The Project Gutenberg EBook of Esperanto Self-Taught with Phonetic
Pronunciation, by William W. Mann

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Esperanto Self-Taught with Phonetic Pronunciation

Author: William W. Mann

Release Date: December 23, 2007 [EBook #23984]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESPERANTO SELF-TAUGHT ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Laurent Vogel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








MARLBOROUGH'S SELF-TAUGHT SERIES


                         Esperanto Self-Taught
                                  WITH
                        PHONETIC PRONUNCIATION.
                                   BY
                           *WILLIAM W. MANN.*
            (_Member of the British Esperanto Association._)

            [Illustration: ST Series--Trade Mark Registered]

                             THIRD EDITION

                        PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

                                LONDON:
           E. MARLBOROUGH & CO., LTD., 51 OLD BAILEY, E.C. 4

                         [ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.]




PREFACE.


The object of this volume is two-fold. It supplies very full and
comprehensive vocabularies of the words required by the tourist or
traveller, visitor or resident abroad, health or pleasure seeker, and
professional or business man, together with a large number of
conversational sentences of a typical and practical character. The words
and phrases are classified according to subject, and the phonetic
pronunciation of every word is added in accordance with Marlborough's
simple and popular system of phonetics.

With the aid of this book anyone may undertake a trip to a foreign land,
even if he know nothing of the language of the country he is going to,
and, if he will put himself beforehand in communication with
Esperantists in the various places he intends to visit, he will find
them ready to help him in many ways, and his stay abroad will thus be
made much more entertaining and instructive than if he had spent his
time in the conventional manner of the ordinary tourist. A further great
advantage of this international language is, that it opens up to the
traveller, not merely one particular country, but the whole of Europe.

The book also aims at affording a practical guide to Esperanto for the
student, who will find, in the section on Grammar, all that he needs to
give him full insight into and grasp of the language, enabling him with
very little effort to read, write and speak correctly.

By joining an Esperanto Group the learner may have frequent opportunity
of conversational practice, and he will soon find that it is by no means
a difficult matter to become as fluent in the auxiliary language as in
his mother-tongue.[1]

Esperanto is not merely a language for tourists, but already possesses a
rich literature of considerable extent, the beginnings of that
"Weltlitteratur" foreseen by Goethe; it has a press of its own
representing every country of importance in the world, and is constantly
being made use of for professional purposes by doctors, scientists,
teachers, lawyers, soldiers, sailors, merchants, etc., in every quarter
of the globe. It is undoubtedly destined, ere many years have passed, to
become a very important factor in the progress of the world.

                                                        WILLIAM W. MANN.

_London, 1908._

_PRINTED AND MADE IN GREAT BRITAIN._

Letchworth: THE GARDEN CITY PRESS LTD.

_Fifth Impression_




CONTENTS.


                                                                   PAGE
  Alphabet, with English Phonetic Pronunciation                       5

  Preliminary Notes.--Accents, Vowels, Diphthongs, etc.               8

  Vocabularies.--Pages 9 to 76.
    Amusement, Recreation and                                        41
    Animals, Vegetables, &c.:
      Animals, Birds and Fishes                                      12
      Fruit, Trees, Flowers and Vegetables                           15
      Reptiles and Insects                                           14
    Colours                                                          17
    Commercial Terms                                                 56
    Correspondence                                                   61
    Countries and Nations                                            40
    Cycling                                                          44
    Cooking and Table Utensils                                       29
    House and Furniture, The                                         34
    Legal Terms                                                      54
    Mankind: Relations                                               22
      Dress and the Toilet                                           30
      Food and Drink                                                 27
      Health                                                         26
      Human Body, The                                                23
      Physical and Mental Powers, Qualities, etc.                    24
    Motoring                                                         47
    Numbers: Cardinal, Ordinal, Collective and Fractional         62-64
    Parts of Speech.--Pages 64 to 76
      Adjectives                                                     64
      Adverbs, Conjunctions, and Prepositions                        72
      Verbs                                                          68
    Photography                                                      48
    Post, Telegraph and Telephone                                    60
    Professions and Trades                                           52
    Recreation and Amusement                                         41
    Religion                                                         50
    Telegraph and Telephone (Post, --)                               60
    Time and Seasons                                                 17
    Town, Country, and Agriculture                                   20
    Travelling: By Road and Rail                                     36
        "       By Ship                                              39
    Washing List                                                     33
    World and its Elements, The                                       9
      Land and Water                                                 10
      Minerals and Metals                                            11

  Grammar.--Pages 77 to 88.
    The Adjective                                                    77
     "  Adverb                                                       83
     "  Article                                                      77
     "  Conjunction                                                  83
     "  Noun                                                         77
     "  Preposition                                                  83
     "  Pronoun                                                      78
     "  Verb                                                         81

  The Formation of Words, etc.--Pages 84 to 88.
    Prefixes and Suffixes                                         84-87
    Compound Words                                                   87
    Correlatives                                                     88

  Conversations.--Pages 89 to 126.
    Amusements                                                      112
    Commercial and Trading                                          125
    Correspondence                                                  122
    Custom House, At the                                             98
    Cycling                                                         114
    Enquiries                                                        93
    Expressions, (Useful and Necessary)                              89
      Expressions of Emotion                                         93
    Health                                                          105
    Legal and Judicial                                              123
    Meals                                                       102-105
      Breakfast                                                     102
      Dinner                                                        103
      Tea                                                           104
    Money Changing                                                  126
    Motoring                                                        115
    Photography                                                     117
    Post and Telegraph                                              121
    Religion                                                        118
    Shopping                                                        108
      Dressmaker                                                    110
      Laundress                                                     111
      Shoemaker                                                     110
    Telegraph (Post and)                                            121
    Time of Day, The                                                118
    Times, Seasons, and Weather                                     119
    Town, In                                                        106
    Travelling:--
      Arrival                                                        99
      Bus and Tram                                                  100
      Changing Money                                                126
      Hotel and Rooms                                               100
      Public Notices                                                 94
      Railway, By                                                    95
      Steamer, By                                                    97
    Useful and Necessary Expressions                                 89

  Money.--Equivalent Values                                         127

  Weights and Measures; Postage                                     128




THE ESPERANTO ALPHABET (WITH PHONETIC PRONUNCIATION).


The Esperanto Alphabet has 28 letters--23 consonants, 5 vowels:--

  Characters. | Name and English Pronunciation.             | Phonetics
              |                                             | used.
              |                                             |
  ------------+---------------------------------------------+-----------
  A, a        | (ah) like _a_ in _father_ or _pa_; as       |
              | _patro_ (pah'troh). In unaccented syllables |
              | it should not be dwelt upon, and in all     |
              | cases it should be pronounced quite purely, |
              | without the slight drawling _r_-sound which |
              | is sometimes added to the corresponding     |
              | vowel in English                            | ah
              |                                             |
  B, b        | (bo) as in English                          | b
              |                                             |
  C, c        | (tsoh) like _ts_ in _gets_, _hits_, and     |
              | never as in English; as _caro_ (tsah'roh)   | ts
              |                                             |
  Ĉ, ĉ        | (cho) like _ch_ in _church_; as _ĉasi_      |
              | (chah'see)                                  | ch
              |                                             |
  D, d        | (do) as in English, but with tip of tongue  |
              | placed on back of teeth instead of on front |
              | ridge of roof of mouth                      | d
              |                                             |
  E, e        | (eh) like _e_ in _bend_ pronounced broadly, |
              | or _a_ in _hate_ shortly pronounced, but    |
              | quite pure, entirely without the slight     |
              | drawling _ee_-sound often heard after the   |
              | English vowel; as _beno_ (beh'noh)          | e, eh
              |                                             |
  F, f        | (fo) as in English                          | f
              |                                             |
  G, g        | (go) like _g_ in _go_, _give_, as _gasto_   |
              | (gah'stoh), and never like _g_ in _gem_,    |
              | _allege_                                    | g
              |                                             |
  Ĝ, ĝ        | (jo) like _g_ in _gem_, _general_, and _j_  |
              | in _jovial_; as _ĝeni_ (jeh'nee)            | j
              |                                             |
  H, h        | (ho) as in English                          | h
              |                                             |
  Ĥ, ĥ        | (ĥo) like _ch_ in Scotch _loch_, _ch_ in    |
              | German _hoch_, _j_ in Spanish _mujer_. This |
              | guttural sound is practically a very        |
              | strongly aspirated _h_, and may be made by  |
              | trying to pronounce "ho" with the throat    |
              | arranged as for saying _k_:--_ĥoro_         |
              | (khoro), _ĥino_ (khino)                     | _kh_
              |                                             |
  I, i        | (ee) like _ee_ in _seen_, as _li_ (lee). In |
              | unaccented syllables, and before two        |
              | consonants together, this _i_ practically   |
              | becomes the _i_ in _it_ or in _wind_; as    |
              | _ferminte_ (fehrr-min'teh)                  | ee, i
              |                                             |
  J, j        | (yo) *always* like _y_ in _yet_, as _jes_   |
              | (yehss), _vojo_ (vo'yo), and never like _j_ |
              | in _judge_, _joke_                          | y
              |                                             |
              | It should be remembered that _j_ is _always |
              | a consonant_, with the sound of the English |
              | _y_ in _you_. Of course, when _j_ occurs at |
              | the end of a word or before a consonant, it |
              | practically unites with the preceding vowel |
              | to form a diphthong, and loses the full     |
              | consonantal sound which it has before a     |
              | vowel. Thus:                                |
              |                                             |
              | _Aj_ (ahy), like _ah y_ in _ah yes_ (almost |
              | like _y_ in _my_); as _kaj_ (kah'y),        |
              | _rajdi_ (rah'y-dee), _krajono_ (krah-yo'no) | ahy
              |                                             |
              | _Ej_ (ehy), like _ay y_ in _say yes_; as    |
              | _plej_ (pleh'y, *one* syllable)             | ehy
              |                                             |
              | _Oj_ (oy), like _oh y_ in _oh yes_ (almost  |
              | like _oy_ in _toy_); as _ranoj_ (rah'noy),  |
              | _kojno_ (koy'noh)                           | oy
              |                                             |
              | _Uj_ (ooy), like _oo y_ in _too young_; as  |
              | _tuj_ (too'y, *one* syllable), _prujno_     |
              | (proo'yno, *two* syllables)                 | ooy
              |                                             |
  Ĵ, ĵ        | (zho) like _s_ in _vision_ or _pleasure_,   |
              | or _j_ in French _jeune, j'ai_; as _ĵeti_   |
              | (zheh'tee)                                  | zh
              |                                             |
  K, k        | (ko) as in English                          | k
              |                                             |
  L, l        | (lo) as in English                          | l
              |                                             |
  M, m        | (mo) as in English                          | m
              |                                             |
  N, n        | (no) as in English                          | n
              |                                             |
  O, o        | (oh) like _o_ in _horse_, not               |
              | diphthongized, but pronounced purely and    |
              | rather shortly, as _bona_ (boh'nah NOT      |
              | bow'nah), quite without the short           |
              | _oo_-sound frequently heard with the        |
              | English vowel in such words as _note_,      |
              | _boat_. Its sound is almost equivalent to   |
              | _aw_ in _caw_, pronounced shortly and with  |
              | the lips placed roundly as if for saying    | o,
              | _oh_; as _estonta_ (ess-tohn'tah)           | oh
              |                                             |
  P, p        | (po) as in English                          | p
              |                                             |
  R, r        | (ro) as in English, but sounded _much more  |
              | forcibly_, and always _with a trill_ as in  |
              | singing; as _korpo_ (kohr'po)               | r
              |                                             |
  S, s        | (so) like _s_ in _say_, as _suno_           |
              | (soo'noh), and *never* as _s_ in _rose_; as |
              | _pesi_ (peh'see)                            | s, ss
              |                                             |
  Ŝ, ŝ        | (sho) like _sh_ in _show_, _she_; as _ŝipo_ |
              | (shee'poh)                                  | sh
              |                                             |
  T, t        | (to) as in English, but dentally--with tip  |
              | of tongue placed on back of teeth instead   |
              | of on front ridge of roof of mouth          | t
              |                                             |
  U, u        | (oo) like _oo_ in _boot_, as _nubo_         |
              | (*noo'*boh); and *never* as _u_ in _mute_   |
              | or _but_                                    | oo
              |                                             |
  Ŭ, ŭ        | (wo) is equivalent to the English _w_, and  |
              | is produced by a _partial bringing          |
              | together_ of the lips. It practically only  |
              | occurs after _a_ or _e_                     | w, ŏŏ
              |                                             |
              | (1) _Aŭ_. To say _antaŭ_, for instance, say |
              | "ahn'tah," and finish by bringing the lips  |
              | slightly together to pronounce the _ŭ_      |
              | (_w_). Similarly for _laŭta_ (lah'w-tah).   |
              | This sound is not exactly the English _ou_  |
              | in _house_, but is just the _au_ in the     |
              | German _Haus_. The phonetic sign for _aŭ_,  |
              | therefore is                                | ahw
              |                                             |
              | (2) _Eŭ_, as in _Eŭropo_ (ehw-ro'poh), is   |
              | pronounced with a similar closing of the    |
              | lips after the _eh-_sound                   | ehw
              |                                             |
  V, v        | (vo) as in English                          | v
              |                                             |
  Z, z        | (zo) as in English                          | z
              |                                             |




PRELIMINARY NOTES.


In order to make the best progress in acquiring the words and sentences
in the following pages, the student is recommended to learn a few at a
time by repeating them aloud with the aid of the phonetic pronunciation
in the third column.

Although the system of phonetics may seem a little cumbersome, practice
will soon enable the student to pronounce the words easily and
naturally. The following notes will be useful:--

1. *Accent.*--In Esperanto, *every letter*, whether vowel or consonant,
*is sounded*. *The accented syllable of a word is always the last but
one.* Thus, _nobla_ (noh'blah), _irado_ (ee-rah'do), _telefono_
(teh-leh-foh'no), _internacia_ (in-tehr-naht-see'ah), _folio_
(fohlee'oh).

It should be borne in mind that _j_ and _ŭ_ *are consonants*, and do
not, like the vowels, of themselves constitute a syllable. Thus, _tiu_
(tee'oo, *two* syllables) and _tiuj_ (tee'ooy, also *two* syllables),
_rajdi_ (rah'y-dee, *not* rah-ĭ'dee), _antaŭ_ (ahn'tahw, *not*
ahn-tah'ŏŏ).

2. *The vowels, _a_, _e_, _i_, _o_, _u_, should in Esperanto be
pronounced quite purely*, and entirely without any drawling after-sound.
Many English speakers diphthongize _a_, _i_, _o_, and pronounce _late_
as "l_a-i_t," _pale_ as "p_a-i_l," _paper_ as "p_a-y_-per," _road_ as
"row-d," etc. This habit of drawling the vowels, when transferred to
Esperanto, thus: _Mi ne povas bone paroli_, mee'y nay'ee poh'ŏŏ-vah(r)ss
boh'ŏŏ-nehy pah(r)-roh'ŏŏ-leey, immediately reveals the nationality of
the speaker.

There is also an inclination to interpose an _r_-sound between _la_
("the") and a word beginning with a vowel, thus: _la(r)ebleco_ instead
of _la ebleco_, _la(r)internacia lingvo_ instead of _la internacia
lingvo_, etc. This should be avoided.

3. *Combinations of Consonants.*--There are a few consonantal
combinations which offer a slight difficulty to English beginners, viz.,
_gv_, _kn_, _kv_, _sc_. The combinations _gv_, _kn_, and _kv_, as in
_gvidi_ (gvee'dee), _knabo_ (knah'bo), _kvieto_ (kvee-eh'toh), may be
practised by first placing a vowel before the _g_ or _k_, and gradually
suppressing it. Thus, first say _la knabo_ (lahk-nah'bo), and gradually
drop the "lah," until finally _knabo_ can be said without difficulty.

The combination _sc_, as in _sceno_ (stseh'no), may be learnt thus: Say
"last sane" several times, very distinctly pronouncing the _st_ and the
_s_, then gradually "'st sane", and finally _sceno_ (stseh'no) without
any preceding vowel-sound. When this combination follows a vowel, as in
_mi scias_, it should cause no difficulty, for the _s_ is easily
pronounced with the first syllable, thus: meess-tsee'ahss.

                   *       *       *       *       *


LETTER FROM DR. ZAMENHOF. (_Founder of Esperanto._)

                                                      Varsovio, 14.9.08.

  KARAJ SINJOROJ,--Kun plezuro kaj danko mi ricevis vian leteron de
  10.9, kaj ankaŭ la presprovaĵon de "Esperanto Self-Taught."

  Ĉar Sro Mann estas tre kompetenta kaj sperta esperantisto, tial mi
  estas tute certa, ke la libro verkita de li estos tre bona kaj tre
  utila.

  Via,

                                                    (_Signed_) ZAMENHOF.

[TRANSLATION.]

                                                      _Warsaw, 14.9.08._

  _Dear Sirs,--I received your letter of Sept. 10, and the proofs of
  "Esperanto Self-Taught," with pleasure and thanks._

  _As Mr. Mann is a very competent and experienced Esperantist, I am
  quite certain that the book written by him will be very good and very
  useful._

  _Yours_,

                                                  (_Signed_) _ZAMENHOF_.




VOCABULARIES.


1. The World & its Elements. (_La Mondo kaj ĝiaj Elementoj._)

(See Notes on the Article)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Air                | _aero_                  | ah-eh'ro
  cloud              | _nubo_                  | noo'bo
  cold               | _malvarmo_              | mahl-vahrr'mo
  darkness           | _mallumo_               | mahl-loo'mo
  dew                | _roso_                  | ro'so
  dust               | _polvo_                 | pohl'vo
  earth              | _tero_                  | teh'ro
  east               | _oriento_               | o-ree-ehn'toh
  eclipse            | _eklipso_               | eh-klip'so
  fire               | _fajro_                 | fahy'ro
  fog                | _nebulo_                | neh-boo'lo
  frost              | _frosto_                | frohst'o
  hail               | _hajlo_                 | hahy'lo
  heat               | _varmo_                 | vahrr'mo
  light              | _lumo_                  | loo'mo
  lightning          | _fulmo_                 | fool'mo
  moon; --, new      | _luno; nova luno_       | loo'no; no'vah loo'no
  --, full           | _plena luno_            | pleh'nah loo'no
  moonlight          | _lunlumo_               | loon'loo'mo
  nature             | _naturo_                | nah-too'ro
  north              | _nordo_                 | nohrr'doh
  rain               | _pluvo_                 | ploo'vo
  rainbow            | _ĉielarko_              | chee-ehl-ahr'ko
  shade, shadow      | _ombro_                 | ohm'bro
  sky                | _ĉielo_                 | chee-eh'lo
  snow               | _neĝo_                  | neh'jo
  south              | _sudo_                  | soo'doh
  star               | _stelo_                 | steh'lo
  sun                | _suno_                  | soo'no
  thaw               | _degelo_                | deh-geh'lo
  thunder            | _tondro_                | tohn'dro
  weather            | _vetero_                | veteh'ro
  west               | _okcidento_             | ohk-tsee-dehn'toh
  wind               | _vento_                 | vehn'toh


2. Land and Water. (_La Tero kaj la Akvo._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Bay                | _golfeto_               | golf-eh'toh
  beach              | _marbordo_              | mahrbohr'doh
  canal              | _kanalo_                | kanah'lo
  cape               | _terkapo_               | tehr-kah'po
  cliff              | _krutegaĵo_             | kroo-teh-gah'zho
  coast              | _marbordo_              | mahr-bohr'doh
  creek              | _kriko_                 | kree'ko
  current            | _akvofluo_              | ahk'vo-floo'oh
  ebb                | _malfluso_              | mahl-floo'so
  flood (deluge)     | _inundo_                | in-oon'doh
  -- (of the tide)   | _fluso_                 | floo'so
  flow               | _fluo_                  | floo'oh
  foam               | _ŝaŭmo_                 | shahw'mo
  hill               | _monteto_               | mohn-teh'toh
  ice                | _glacio_                | glaht-see'oh
  island             | _insulo_                | in-soo'lo
  lake               | _lago_                  | lah'go
  land               | _tero_                  | teh'ro
  mainland           | _ĉeftero_               | chehf-teh'ro
  marsh              | _marĉo_                 | mahr'cho
  moor               | _stepo_                 | steh'po
  mountain           | _monto_                 | mohn'toh
  mud                | _koto_                  | ko'toh
  river              | _rivero_                | reeveh'ro
  rock               | _roko_                  | ro'ko
  sand               | _sablo_                 | sah'blo
  sea                | _maro_                  | mah'ro
  sea-shore          | _marbordo_              | mahr-bohr'doh
  shingle            | _ŝtonetaĵo_             | shto-neh-tah'zho
  storm              | _ventego_               | ven-teh'go
  stream             | _rivereto_              | rivehr-eh'toh
  tide; --, high     | _tajdo; altmaro_        | tahy'doh; ahlt-mah'ro
  --, low            | _malaltmaro_            | mahl'ahlt-mah'ro
  valley             | _valo_                  | vah'lo
  water; --, fresh   | _akvo; sensala akvo_    | ahk'vo; sen-sah'la
                     |                         |   ahk'vo
  --, salt           | _sala akvo_             | sah'la ahk'vo
  waterfall          | _akvofalo_              | ahk'vo-fah'lo
  wave               | _ondo_                  | ohn'doh
  well               | _akvoputo_              | ahk'vo-poo'toh


3. Minerals & Metals. (_Mineraloj kaj Metaloj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Alum               | _aluno_                 | ahloo'no
  amber              | _sukceno_               | sookt-seh'no
  brass              | _latuno_                | lah-too'no
  bricks             | _brikoj_                | bree'koy
  bronze             | _bronzo_                | brohn'zo
  cement             | _cemento_               | tseh-mehn'to
  chalk              | _kreto_                 | kreh'to
  clay               | _argilo_                | ahr-ghee'lo
  coal               | _karbo_                 | kahrr'bo
  concrete           | _betono_                | beh-toh'no
  copper             | _kupro_                 | koo'pro
  coral              | _koralo_                | kohrah'lo
  crystal            | _kristalo_              | kris-tah'lo
  diamond            | _diamanto_              | dee-ahmahn'toh
  emerald            | _smeraldo_              | smehrahl'doh
  glass              | _vitro_                 | vee'tro
  gold               | _oro_                   | oh'ro
  granite            | _granito_               | grahnee'toh
  gravel             | _gruzo_                 | groo'zo
  iron               | _fero_                  | feh'ro
  --, cast           | _fandfero_              | fahnd-feh'ro
  --, wrought        | _forĝfero_              | fohrj-feh'ro
  lead               | _plumbo_                | ploom'bo
  lime               | _kalko_                 | kahl'ko
  marble             | _marmoro_               | mahrr-moh'ro
  mercury            | _hidrargo_              | heedrahrr'go
  mortar             | _mortero_               | mohr-teh'ro
  nickel             | _nikelo_                | nik-eh'loh
  opal               | _opalo_                 | ohpah'lo
  ore                | _minaĵo_                | meenah'zho
  pearl              | _perlo_                 | pehrr'lo
  ruby               | _rubeno_                | roobeh'no
  silver             | _arĝento_               | ahrr-jehn'toh
  slate              | _ardezo_                | ahrr-deh'zo
  soda               | _sodo_                  | so'doh
  steel              | _ŝtalo_                 | shtah'lo
  stone              | _ŝtono_                 | shtoh'no
  tin                | _stano_                 | stah'no
  zinc               | _zinko_                 | zeen'ko


4. Animals, Birds & Fishes. (_Bestoj, Birdoj, kaj Fiŝoj._)

(See Shopping, §. 53.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Animal             | _besto_                 | beh'stoh
  barking            | _bojado_                | bo-yah'doh
  bear               | _urso_                  | oorr'so
  bird               | _birdo_                 | beerr'doh
  blackbird          | _merlo_                 | mehrr'lo
  braying            | _azenbleko_             | ah-zehn-bleh'ko
  bull               | _bovoviro_              | bo'vo-veer'oh
  calf               | _bovido_                | bo-vee'doh
  canary             | _kanario_               | kanah-ree'oh
  cat                | _kato_                  | kah'toh
  chicken            | _kokido_                | ko-kee'doh
  claw, nail         | _ungo_                  | oon'go
  cock               | _koko_                  | ko'ko
  cod                | _moruo_                 | mo-roo'oh
  colt               | _ĉevalido_              | chehvah-lee'doh
  cow                | _bovino_                | bo-vee'no
  crab               | _krabo_                 | krah'bo
  cuckoo             | _kukolo_                | koo-ko'lo
  deer               | _damcervo_              | dahm-tsehrr'vo
  dog                | _hundo_                 | hoon'doh
  donkey             | _azeno_                 | ah-zeh'no
  dove, pigeon       | _kolombo_               | ko-lohm'bo
  duck               | _anaso_                 | ah-nah'so
  --, wild           | _sovaĝa anaso_          | so-vah'ja ah-nah'so
  eagle              | _aglo_                  | ah'glo
  eel                | _angilo_                | ahn-ghee'lo
  elephant           | _elefanto_              | ehleh-fahn'toh
  feather            | _plumo_                 | ploo'mo
  fins               | _naĝiloj_               | nah-jee'loy
  fish               | _fiŝo_                  | fee'sho
  fowl               | _kortbirdo_             | kohrrt-beer'doh
  fox                | _vulpo_                 | vool'po
  fur                | _felo_                  | feh'lo
  game               | _ĉasaĵo_                | chah-sah'zho
  gills              | _brankoj_               | brahn'koy
  goat               | _kapro_                 | kah'pro
  goose              | _ansero_                | ahn-seh'ro
  gull               | _mevo_                  | meh'vo
  haddock            | _eglefino_              | eh-gleh-fee'no
  hake               | _merluĉo_               | mehr-loo'cho
  hare               | _leporo_                | lepoh'ro
  hen                | _kokino_                | ko-kee'no
  herring            | _haringo_               | har-een'go
  hoof               | _hufo_                  | hoo'foh
  horn               | _korno_                 | kohrr'no
  horse              | _ĉevalo_                | cheh-vah'loh
  howling            | _blekado_               | bleh-kah'doh
  lamb               | _ŝafido_                | shah-fee'do
  lark               | _alaŭdo_                | ahl-ahw'doh
  lion               | _leono_                 | leh-oh'no
  lobster            | _omaro_                 | o-mah'ro
  mackerel           | _skombro_               | skohm'bro
  magpie             | _pigo_                  | pee'go
  mane               | _kolhararo_             | kohl'har-ah'ro
  mewing             | _miaŭado_               | mee-ah-wah'doh
  monkey             | _simio_                 | sim-ee'oh
  mouse              | _muso_                  | moo'so
  mullet             | _mugelo_                | moo-gheh'lo
  nightingale        | _najtingalo_            | nahy-tin-gah'lo
  owl                | _strigo_                | stree'go
  ox                 | _bovo_                  | bo'vo
  oyster             | _ostro_                 | oh'stro
  parrot             | _papago_                | pa-pah'go
  partridge          | _perdriko_              | pehr-dree'ko
  paw                | _piedo_                 | pee-eh'doh
  peacock            | _pavo_                  | pah'voh
  pheasant           | _fazano_                | fah-zah'no
  pig                | _porko_                 | pohrr'ko
  pike               | _ezoko_                 | eh-zo'ko
  plaice             | _plateso_               | plah-teh'so
  quail              | _koturno_               | ko-toorr'no
  rabbit             | _kuniklo_               | koo-nee'klo
  rat                | _rato_                  | rah'toh
  raven              | _korvo_                 | kohrr'vo
  rook               | _frugilego_             | froo-ghee-leh'go
  salmon             | _salmo_                 | sahl'mo
  sheep              | _ŝafo_                  | shah'fo
  snipe              | _marĉa skolopo_         | mar'chah sko-lo'po
  sparrow            | _pasero_                | pa-seh'ro
  stork              | _cikonio_               | tsee-konee'oh
  swallow            | _hirundo_               | hee-roon'doh
  swan               | _cigno_                 | tseeg'noh
  tail               | _vosto_                 | vo'sto
  thrush             | _turdo_                 | toorr'doh
  tiger              | _tigro_                 | tee'gro
  tortoise           | _testudo_               | tess-too'doh
  trout              | _truto_                 | troo'toh
  turbot             | _rombfiŝo_              | rohmb-fee'sho
  turkey             | _meleagro_              | meh-leh-ah'gro
  turtle             | _kelonio_               | keh-lo-nee'oh
  whale              | _baleno_                | bah-leh'no
  wing               | _flugilo_               | floo-ghee'lo
  wolf               | _lupo_                  | loo'po
  wren               | _regolo_                | reh-go'lo


5. Reptiles & Insects. (_Rampuloj kaj Insektoj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Ant                | _formiko_               | fohrmee'ko
  bee                | _abelo_                 | ah-beh'lo
  beetle             | _skarabo_               | skarah'bo
  bug                | _cimo_                  | tsee'moh
  butterfly          | _papilio_               | pah-peelee'oh
  caterpillar        | _raŭpo_                 | rahw'po
  flea               | _pulo_                  | poo'lo
  fly                | _muŝo_                  | moo'shoh
  frog               | _rano_                  | rah'noh
  gnat               | _kulo_                  | koo'lo
  grasshopper        | _akrido_                | ah-kree'doh
  insect             | _insekto_               | insek'toh
  moth; --, clothes- | _faleno; tineo_         | fah-leh'no; teeneh'oh
  silkworm           | _silkraŭpo_             | silk-rahw'po
  snail              | _heliko_                | heh-lee'ko
  snake              | _serpento_              | sehr-pehn'toh
  spider             | _araneo_                | arah-neh'oh
  sting              | _pikilo_                | peekee'lo
  toad               | _bufo_                  | boo'fo
  wasp               | _vespo_                 | vehs'po
  worm               | _vermo_                 | vehrr'mo


6. Fruits, Trees[2], Flowers & Vegetables (_Fruktoj, Arboj, Floroj, kaj
Legomoj._)

(For Shopping, see §. 52.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Acorn              | _glano_                 | glah'noh
  almond             | _migdalo_               | mig-dah'lo
  apple              | _pomo_                  | poh'mo
  apricot            | _abrikoto_              | ahbree-ko'toh
  ash                | _frakseno_              | frahk-seh'noh
  asparagus          | _asparago_              | ahspah-rah'go
  banana             | _banano_                | bahnah'no
  bark               | _arbŝelo_               | ahrb-sheh'lo
  beans              | _faboj_                 | fah'boy
  beech (-tree)      | _fago_                  | fah'go
  beetroot           | _beto_                  | beh'toh
  birch (-tree)      | _betulo_                | beh-too'lo
  blackberry         | _rubuso_                | roo-boo'so
  bouquet            | _bukedo_                | bookeh'do
  branch             | _branĉo_                | brahn'cho
  buttercup          | _ranunkulo_             | rahnoon-koo'lo
  cabbage            | _brasiko_               | brahsee'ko
  carrot             | _karoto_                | kahroh'toh
  cauliflower        | _florbrasiko_           | flohr'brah-see'ko
  celery             | _celerio_               | tseh-lehree'oh
  cherry             | _ĉerizo_                | chehree'zo
  chestnut (edible)  | _kaŝtano_               | kashtah'no
  chrysanthemum      | _krizantemo_            | krizahn-teh'mo
  cucumber           | _kukumo_                | kookoo'mo
  currants (dried)   | _korintoj_              | kohreen'toy
  daisy              | _lekanteto_             | leh-kahn-teh'toh
  dandelion          | _leontodo_              | leh-ontoh'doh
  elm (-tree)        | _ulmo_                  | ool'mo
  evergreen          | _ĉiamverdulo_           | chee'ahm-vehrdoo'lo
  fern               | _filiko_                | feelee'ko
  fibre              | _fibro_                 | fee'broh
  fig                | _figo_                  | fee'go
  fir (-tree)        | _abio_                  | ahbee'oh
  flower             | _floro_                 | floh'roh
  fruit-tree         | _fruktarbo_             | frookt-ahr'bo
  gooseberry         | _groso_                 | groh'so
  grape              | _vinbero_               | veenbeh'ro
  holly              | _ilekso_                | eelek'so
  horse-chestnut     | _hipo-kaŝtano_          | hee'po-kahshtah'no
  horse-radish       | _kreno_                 | kreh'no
  ivy                | _hedero_                | heh-deh'ro
  kernel             | _kerno_                 | kehrr'no
  laurel             | _laŭro_                 | lahw'ro
  leaf               | _folio_                 | fohlee'oh
  lemon              | _citrono_               | tsee-troh'no
  lettuce            | _laktuko_               | lahk-too'ko
  lily               | _lilio_                 | leelee'oh
  lily-of-the-valley | _konvalo_               | kohn-vah'lo
  lime (fruit);      | _limedo; tilio_         | leemeh'do; teelee'oh
    -tree            |                         |
  maize              | _maizo_                 | mah-ee'zo
  maple              | _acero_                 | aht-seh'ro
  melon              | _melono_                | meh-loh'no
  misletoe           | _visko_                 | vees'ko
  mulberry           | _moruso_                | moh-roo'so
  nettle             | _urtiko_                | oortee'ko
  nut; walnut        | _nukso; juglando_       | nook'so; yooglahn'do
  oak (-tree)        | _kverko_                | kvehrr'ko
  onion              | _bulbo_                 | bool'bo
  orange             | _oranĝo_                | ohrahn'jo
  parsnip            | _pastinako_             | pahstee-nah'ko
  peach              | _persiko_               | pehrr-see'ko
  pear               | _piro_                  | pee'ro
  peas               | _pizoj_                 | pee'zoy
  pine-apple         | _ananaso_               | ah-nahnah'so
  plant              | _kreskaĵo_              | kreskah'zho
  plum               | _pruno_                 | proo'no
  potatoes           | _terpomo_               | tehrr-poh'mo
  primrose           | _primolo_               | pree-mo'lo
  privet             | _ligustro_              | lee-goost'ro
  pumpkin            | _kukurbo_               | kookoorr'bo
  radishes           | _rafanoj_               | rahfah'noy
  raisins            | _sekvinberoj_           | sek-vinbeh'roy
  raspberry          | _frambo_                | frahm'bo
  root               | _radiko_                | rahdee'ko
  rose               | _rozo_                  | roh'zo
  skin, shell (of    | _ŝelo_                  | sheh'lo
    fruit)           |                         |
  sloe               | _prunelo_               | prooneh'lo
  spinach            | _spinaco_               | speenaht'so
  stalk, stem        | _trunketo_              | troonkeh'toh
  strawberry         | _frago_                 | frah'go
  stump              | _stumpo_                | stoom'po
  tomato             | _tomato_                | toh-mah'toh
  tree               | _arbo_                  | ar'bo
  trunk (tree-)      | _trunko_                | troon'ko
  tulip              | _tulipo_                | toolee'po
  turnip             | _napo_                  | nah'po
  vegetable marrow   | _medolkukurbo_          | mehdohl'kookoor'bo
  vine               | _vinberujo_             | vinbehr-oo'yoh
  violet             | _violo_                 | vee-oh'lo
  willow             | _saliko_                | sahlee'ko


7. Colours. (_Koloroj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Black              | _nigra_                 | nee'gra
  blue               | _blua_                  | bloo'ah
  brown              | _bruna_                 | broo'na
  crimson            | _punca_                 | poont'sah
  dark               | _malhela_               | mahl-heh'la
  green              | _verda_                 | vehrr'da
  grey               | _griza_                 | gree'za
  light              | _hela_                  | heh'la
  orange             | _oranĝa_                | ohrahn'ja
  pink               | _rozkolora_             | rohz-kohlo'ra
  purple             | _purpura_               | poorr-poo'ra
  red                | _ruĝa_                  | roo'ja
  scarlet            | _skarlata_              | skahr-lah'ta
  violet             | _violkolora_            | veeohl'kohlo'ra
  white              | _blanka_                | blahn'ka
  yellow             | _flava_                 | flah'va


8. Times & Seasons. (_La Tempoj kaj la Sezonoj._)

(For Conversations, see §. 63.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Afternoon          | _posttagmezo_           | post-tahg-meh'zo
  Bank holidays      | _bankaj libertagoj_     | bahn'kahy
                     |                         |   lee-behrr-tah'goy
    Good Friday      | _Sankta Vendredo_       | sahnk'tah ven-dreh'doh
    Easter Monday    | _Paska lundo_           | pah'skah loon'doh
    Whit-Monday      | _Pentekosta lundo_      | penteh-ko'stah loon'doh
    first Monday in  | _la unua lundo en       | lah oo-noo'ah loon'doh
      August         |   Aŭgusto_              |   en ahw-goo'sto
    Boxing-day       | _la tago post           | lah tah'go post
                     |   Kristnasko_           |   krist-nah'sko
  beginning          | _komenciĝo_             | koh-ment-see'jo
  birthday           | _naskotago_             | nah'sko-tah'go
  century            | _centjaro_              | tsehnt-yah'ro
  Christmas-day      | _Kristnasko_            | krist-nah'sko
  dawn, daybreak     | _tagiĝo_                | tah-ghee'jo
  day                | _tago_                  | tah'go
  days of the week   | _tagoj de la semajno_   | tah'goy deh la
                     |                         |   sehmahy'no
    Sunday           | _dimanĉo_               | deemahn'cho
    Monday           | _lundo_                 | loon'doh
    Tuesday          | _mardo_                 | mahrr'doh
    Wednesday        | _merkredo_              | mehrr-kreh'doh
    Thursday         | _ĵaŭdo_                 | zhahw'doh
    Friday           | _vendredo_              | vendreh'doh
    Saturday         | _sabato_                | sahbah'toh
  Easter             | _Pasko_                 | pah'sko
  end                | _fino_                  | fee'no
  evening            | _vespero_               | veh-speh'ro
  fortnight          | _du semajnoj_           | doo seh-mahy'noy
  half               | _duono_                 | doo-oh'no
  half-a-century     | _duoncentjaro_          | doo-ohn'tsent-yah'ro
  half-an-hour       | _duonhoro_              | doo-ohn-ho'ro
  holiday            | _libertempo_            | libehr-tehm'po
  hour               | _horo_                  | ho'ro
  last month         | _lastan monaton_        | lah'stahn monah'tohn
  last night         | _hieraŭ nokte_          | hee-eh'rahw nohk'teh
  last Sunday        | _lastan dimanĉon_       | lah'stahn deemahn'chon
  last week          | _lastan semajnon_       | lah'stahn seh-mahy'nohn
                     |                         |
  leap year          | _superjaro_             | soo'pehrr-yah'ro
  Lent               | _la Fastsezono_         | la fahst'seh-zo'no
  Michaelmas         | _la tago de Sankta      | lah tah'go deh
                     |   Miĥaelo_              |   sahnk'tah
                     |                         |   mee_kh_ah-eh'lo
  midnight           | _noktomezo_             | nohk'toh-meh'zo
  midsummer          | _somermezo_             | so-mehr-meh'zo
  minute             | _minuto_                | mee-noo'toh
  month              | _monato_                | mo-nah'toh
  months, the        | _la monatoj_            | la mo-nah'toy
    January          | _Januaro_               | yah-noo-ah'ro
    February         | _Februaro_              | feh-broo-ah'ro
    March            | _Marto_                 | mahrr'toh
    April            | _Aprilo_                | ah-pree'lo
    May              | _Majo_                  | mah'yo
    June             | _Junio_                 | yoo-nee'oh
    July             | _Julio_                 | yoo-lee'oh
    August           | _Aŭgusto_               | ahw-goost'oh
    September        | _Septembro_             | sep-tehm'bro
    October          | _Oktobro_               | ok-toh'bro
    November         | _Novembro_              | no-vehm'bro
    December         | _Decembro_              | deht-sehm'bro
  morning            | _mateno_                | mah-teh'no
  next day           | _la proksima(n)         | la proksee'mah(n)
                     |   tago(n)_[3]           |   tah'goh(n)
  night              | _nokto_                 | nok'toh
  noon               | _tagmezo_               | tahg-meh'zo
  quarter            | _kvarono_               | kvah-ro'no
  quarter of an hour | _kvaronhoro_            | kvah-rohn-ho'ro
  season             | _sezono_                | seh-zo'no
  seasons            | _la sezonoj_            | la seh-zo'noy
    spring           | _printempo_             | prin-tehm'po
    summer           | _somero_                | soh-mehr'o
    autumn           | _aŭtuno_                | ahw-too'no
    winter           | _vintro_                | vin'tro
  second             | _sekundo_               | seh-koon'doh
  sunrise            | _sunleviĝo_             | soon'leh-vee'jo
  sunset             | _sunsubiro_             | soon'soobeer'o
  time               | _tempo_                 | tehm'po
  to-day             | _hodiaŭ_                | hoh-dee'ahw
  to-morrow          | _morgaŭ_                | morr'gahw
  to-night           | _hodiaŭ nokte_          | hoh-dee'ahw nok'teh
  twilight           | _krepusko_              | krehpoos'ko
  week               | _semajno_               | seh-mahy'no
  week-day           | _labortago_             | lahbohr-tah'go
  Whitsuntide        | _Pentekosto_            | penteh-kohs'toh
  year               | _jaro_                  | yah'ro
  yesterday          | _hieraŭ_                | hee-eh'rahw
  yesterday morning  | _hieraŭ matene_         | hee-eh'rahw mahteh'neh


9. Town, Country and Agriculture. (_La Urbo, la Kamparo, kaj la
Terkulturo_).

(For Conversations, see §. 52.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Bank               | _deklivo_               | deh-klee'vo
  bank (edge)        | _bordo_                 | bohrr'doh
  barley             | _hordeo_                | hohrdeh'o
  barn               | _grenejo_               | greh-neh'yo
  bridge             | _ponto_                 | pohn'toh
  brook              | _rivereto_              | reevehr-eh'toh
  building           | _konstruaĵo_            | kon-stroo-ah'zho
  bush, shrub        | _arbusto_               | ahrr-boo'sto
  cattle             | _brutoj_                | broo'toy
  cemetery           | _tombejo_               | tohm-beh'yo
  clover             | _trifolio_              | tree-fohl-ee'o
  corn               | _greno_                 | greh'no
  cottage            | _dometo_                | doh-meh'toh
  country, the       | _la kamparo_            | lah kahm-pah'ro
  courtyard          | _korto_                 | kohrr'toh
  crop               | _rikolto_               | ree-kohl'toh
  dairy              | _laktejo_               | lahk-teh'yo
  ditch              | _fosaĵo_                | foh-sah'zho
  drain              | _drenilo_               | drehn-ee'lo
  farm               | _farmbieno_             | fahrm'bee-eh'no
  farmer             | _farmisto_              | fahrm-ist'o
  fence              | _palisaro_              | pahlee-sah'ro
  field              | _kampo_                 | kahm'po
  flock (of sheep)   | _ŝafaro_                | shahf-ah'ro
  foot-path          | _piedvojeto_            | pee-ehd'vo-yeh'toh
  foot-pavement      | _trotuaro_              | tro-tooahr'o
  forest             | _arbaro_                | ahr-bar'o
  garden             | _ĝardeno_               | jahrr-deh'no
  gate               | _barpordo_              | bahr-pohr'doh
  grass              | _herbo_                 | hehrr'bo
  harvest            | _grenrikolto_           | grehn'reekohl'toh
  hay                | _fojno_                 | foy'no
  hedge              | _plektobarilo_          | plek'toh-bahree'lo
  herd               | _bovaro_                | bo-vah'ro
  high road          | _ĉefvojo_               | chehf-vo'yoh
  hotel              | _hotelo_                | ho-teh'lo
  hut                | _kabano_                | kah-bah'noh
  inn                | _gastejo_               | gah-steh'yoh
  labourer           | _laboristo_             | lah-bo-reest'o
  land, soil         | _tero_                  | tehr'o
  library            | _biblioteko_            | bib-lee-oh-teh'ko
  log                | _ŝtipo_                 | shtee'po
  manure             | _sterko_                | stehrr'ko
  market             | _vendejo_               | vendeh'yo
  market-place       | _vendeja placo_         | vendeh'ya plaht'so
  meadow             | _herbejo_               | hehr-beh'yo
  mile               | _mejlo_                 | mehy'lo
  mill               | _muelilo_               | moo-ehlee'lo
  monument           | _monumento_             | mo-noomehn'toh
  oats               | _aveno_                 | ah-veh'no
  palace             | _palaco_                | pah-laht'so
  place, spot        | _loko_                  | lo'ko
  pasture            | _paŝtejo_               | pah-shteh'yo
  plough             | _plugilo_               | ploo-ghee'lo
  police-station     | _policejo_              | pohleet-seh'yo
  prison             | _malliberejo_           | mahl-lee-beh-reh'yo
  public-house       | _trinkejo_              | trin-keh'yoh
  restaurant         | _restoracio_            | restohraht-see'o
  river              | _rivero_                | ree-veh'ro
  road               | _vojo_                  | vo'yoh
  rye                | _sekalo_                | seh-kah'lo
  school             | _lernejo_               | lehrr-neh'yo
  seed               | _semo_                  | seh'mo
  shepherd           | _paŝtisto_              | pah-shteest'o
  shop               | _butiko_                | bootee'ko
  square             | _placo_                 | plaht'so
  stack              | _stako_                 | stah'ko
  street             | _strato_                | strah'toh
  street-lamp        | _stratlanterno_         | straht'lahn-tehrr'no
  tower              | _turo_                  | toor'o
  town               | _urbo_                  | oorr'bo
  town-hall          | _urbdomo_               | oorrb-doh'mo
  tramway            | _tramvojo_              | trahm-vo'yoh
  tree               | _arbo_                  | ahrr'bo
  university         | _universitato_          | oonivehr-seetah'toh
  village            | _vilaĝo_                | veelah'jo
  waterfall          | _akvofalo_              | ahk'vo-fah'lo
  wheat              | _tritiko_               | treetee'ko


10. Mankind: Relations. (_La Homaro: Parencoj_).

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Aunt               | _onklino_               | ohn-klee'no
  baby               | _infaneto_              | infahn-eh'toh
  boy                | _knabo_                 | knah'bo
  bride              | _edzinigato_            | ed-zeenee-gah'toh
  bridegroom         | _edzigato_              | edzee-gah'toh
  brother            | _frato_                 | frah'toh
  child              | _infano_                | infahn'o
  cousin             | _kuzo_ m., _kuzino_ f.  | koo'zo, koozee'no
  daughter           | _filino_                | feelee'no
  daughter-in-law    | _bofilino_              | bo-feelee'no
  family             | _familio_               | fahmee-lee'o
  father             | _patro_                 | pah'tro
  father-in-law      | _bopatro_               | bo-pah'tro
  gentleman, Mr.     | _sinjoro_               | seenyohr'o
  girl               | _knabino_               | knah-bee'no
  grand-daughter     | _nepino_                | neh-pee'no
  grandfather        | _avo_                   | ah'vo
  grandmother        | _avino_                 | ah-vee'no
  grandson           | _nepo_                  | neh'po
  husband            | _edzo_                  | ehd'zo
  lady, Mrs.         | _sinjorino_             | seen-yohr-ee'no
  man, a             | _viro_                  | vee'ro
  man (human being)  | _homo_                  | ho'mo
  marriage           | _edziĝo_                | ed-zee'jo
  mother             | _patrino_               | pah-tree'no
  mother-in-law      | _bopatrino_             | bo-pah-tree'no
  nephew             | _nevo_                  | neh'vo
  niece              | _nevino_                | neh-vee'no
  parents            | _gepatroj_              | gheh-pah'troy
  people, the        | _la popolo_             | lah po-po'lo
  person             | _persono_               | pehr-so'no
  single man,        | _fraŭlo_                | frahw'lo
    bachelor         |                         |
  single woman,      | _fraŭlino_              | frahw-lee'no
    young lady, Miss |                         |
  sister             | _fratino_               | frah-tee'no
  sister-in-law      | _bofratino_             | bo-frahtee'no
  son                | _filo_                  | fee'lo
  step-son           | _duonfilo_              | doo-ohn-fee'lo
  uncle              | _onklo_                 | ohn'klo
  widow              | _vidvino_               | vid-vee'no
  widower            | _vidvo_                 | veed'vo
  wife               | _edzino_                | ed-zee'no
  woman              | _virino_                | veeree'no


11. The Human Body. (_La Homa Korpo_).

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Abdomen            | _ventro_                | vehn'tro
  ankle              | _maleolo_               | mah-leh-o'lo
  arm                | _brako_                 | brah'ko
  back               | _dorso_                 | dohrr'so
  beard              | _barbo_                 | bahrr'bo
  blood              | _sango_                 | sahn'go
  body               | _korpo_                 | kohrr'po
  bone               | _osto_                  | oh'sto
  bowels             | _intestoj_              | intess'toy
  brain              | _cerbo_                 | tsehrr'bo
  cheek              | _vango_                 | vahn'go
  chest              | _brusto_                | broo'sto
  chin               | _mentono_               | men-toh'no
  complexion         | _vizaĝkoloro_           | veezahj'ko-lohr'o
  ear                | _orelo_                 | o-reh'lo
  elbow              | _kubuto_                | kooboo'toh
  eye                | _okulo_                 | o-koo'lo
  eyebrow            | _brovo_                 | bro'vo
  eyelid             | _palpebro_              | pahlpeh'bro
  face               | _vizaĝo_                | vee-zah'jo
  finger             | _fingro_                | feen'gro
  foot               | _piedo_                 | pee-eh'doh
  forehead           | _frunto_                | froon'toh
  hair, a; hair, -s  | _haro; la haroj_        | ha'ro; la hah'roy
  hand               | _mano_                  | mah'no
  head               | _kapo_                  | kah'po
  heart              | _koro_                  | ko'ro
  heel               | _kalkano_               | kahlkah'no
  kidneys            | _renoj_                 | reh'noy
  knee               | _genuo_                 | gheh-noo'oh
  leg                | _kruro_                 | kroo'ro
  limb               | _membro_                | mehm'bro
  lip                | _lipo_                  | lee'po
  liver              | _hepato_                | heh-pah'toh
  lungs              | _pulmoj_                | pool'moy
  moustache          | _lipharoj_              | leep-hah'roy
  mouth              | _buŝo_                  | boo'sho
  nail               | _ungo_                  | oon'go
  neck               | _kolo_                  | ko'lo
  nose               | _nazo_                  | nah'zo
  shoulder           | _ŝultro_                | shool'tro
  side               | _flanko_                | flahn'ko
  skin               | _haŭto_                 | hahw'toh
  spine              | _spino_                 | spee'no
  stomach            | _stomako_               | sto-mah'ko
  temple             | _tempio_                | tehmpee'oh
  throat             | _gorĝo_                 | gohrr'jo
  thumb              | _dika fingro_           | dee'kah feen'gro
  toe                | _piedfingro_            | pee-ehd-feen'gro
  tongue             | _lango_                 | lahn'go
  tooth              | _dento_                 | dehn'toh
  whiskers           | _vangharoj_             | vahng-hah'roy
  wrist              | _karpeo_                | kahrr-peh'o


12. Physical & Mental Powers, Qualities, etc. (_Korpaj kaj Mensaj
Kapabloj, Ecoj, k.t.p._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Age                | _aĝo_                   | ah'jo
  --, old            | _maljuneco_             | mahl-yoon-eht'so
  anger              | _kolero_                | ko-leh'ro
  art                | _arto_                  | ahrr'toh
  breadth, width     | _larĝeco_               | lahrr-jeht'so
  character          | _karaktero_             | kar-ahk-teh'ro
  childhood          | _infaneco_              | infahn-eht'so
  depth              | _profundeco_            | pro-foon-deht'so
  dislike            | _malameti_              | mah-lah-meh'tee
  emotions           | _emocioj_               | eh-moht-see'oy
  fear               | _timo_                  | tee'mo
  foolishness, folly | _malsaĝeco_             | mahl-sah-jeht'so
  gentleness         | _mildeco_               | meel-deht'so
  goodness           | _boneco_                | bo-neht'so
  greatness          | _grandeco_              | grahn-deht'so
  hatred             | _malamo_                | mahl-ah'mo
  height             | _grandeco_              | grahn-deht'so
    stature          | _staturo_               | stah-too'ro
  honesty;           | _honesteco; mal-_       | honest-eht'so; mahl-
    dishonesty       |                         |
  honour; dishonour  | _honoro; mal-_          | ho-noh'ro; mahl-
  intellect          | _intelekto_             | intelehk'toh
  intelligence       | _inteligenteco_         | intehlee-ghen-teht'so
  joy                | _ĝojo_                  | joh'yo
  judgment (faculty) | _juĝkapablo_            | yooj'kah-pah'blo
  knowledge          | _scio_                  | stsee'oh
  laughter; a laugh  | _ridado; rido_          | ree-dah'doh; ree'doh
  learning           | _klereco_               | klehr-eht'so
  length             | _longeco_               | lohn-geht'so
  love               | _amo_                   | ah'mo
  manhood            | _vireco_                | veer-eht'so
  mind               | _menso_                 | mehn'so
  patience           | _pacienco_              | paht-see-ehnt'so
  pleasure           | _plezuro_               | pleh-zoor'o
  politeness,        | _ĝentileco_             | jehn-tee-leht'so
    courtesy         |                         |
  reason (faculty)   | _prudento_              | proo-dehn'toh
  science            | _scienco_               | stsee-ehnt'so
  senses, the        | _la sentoj_             | lah sehn'toy
    feeling, touch   | _palpado_               | pahl-pah'doh
    hearing          | _aŭdado_                | ahw-dah'doh
    seeing, sight    | _vidado_                | vee-dah'doh
    smelling, smell  | _flarado_               | flah-rah'do
    tasting, taste   | _gustumado_             | goostoom-ah'doh
  shape              | _formo_                 | fohrr'mo
  size               | _amplekso_              | ahm-plek'so
  smell (odour)      | _odoro_                 | oh-doh'ro
  smiling; a smile   | _ridetado; rideto_      | reedehtah'do;
                     |                         |   reedeh'toh
  sneezing; a sneeze | _ternado; terno_        | tehrr-nah'doh; tehrr'no
  sorrow             | _malĝojo_               | mahl-jo'yo
  speaking, speech   | _parolado_              | pah-ro-lah'doh
  strength           | _forteco_               | fohrr-teht'so
  stupidity          | _stulteco_              | stool-teht'so
  surprise           | _surprizo_              | soorr-pree'zo
  taste (of a thing) | _gusto_                 | goos'toh
  thickness          | _dikeco_                | dee-keht'so
  thinking, thought  | _pensado_               | pehn-sah'doh
  thought, a         | _penso_                 | pehn'so
  voice              | _voĉo_                  | vo'cho
  weakness (quality) | _malforteco_            | mahl-fohrr-teht'so
  wisdom             | _saĝo_                  | sah'jo
  womanhood          | _virineco_              | vee-ree-neht'so
  youth (quality)    | _juneco_                | yoo-neht'so


13. Health. (_La Sano._)

(For Conversations see §. 51.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Accident           | _akcidento_             | ahkt-see-dehn'toh
  ambulance          | _ambulanco_             | ahm-boo-lahnt'so
  bandage            | _bandaĝo_               | bahn-dah'jo
  biliousness        | _galmalsano_            | gahl-mahl-sah'no
  blister            | _veziketo_              | veh-zee-keh'toh
  bruise             | _kontuzo_               | kon-too'zo
  burn               | _brulvundo_             | brool-voon'doh
  chemist's (shop)   | _apoteko_               | ahpo-teh'ko
  chilblain          | _frostabsceso_          | frohst-ahbs-tseh'so
  chill, cold        | _malvarmumo_            | mahl-vahr-moo'mo
  contagion          | _kontaĝio_              | kon-tahjee'o
  corns              | _kaloj_                 | kah'loy
  cough              | _tuso_                  | too'so
  cramp              | _krampfo_               | krahmp'fo
  dentist            | _dentisto_              | dehn-tis'toh
  diarrhœa           | _lakso_                 | lahk'so
  diet               | _dieto_                 | dee-eht'o
  disease, illness   | _malsano_               | mahl-sah'no
  doctor             | _kuracisto_             | koo-raht-sis'toh
  dysentery          | _disenterio_            | dis-ehn-teh-ree'o
  exercise           | _ekzercado_             | ek-zehrt-sah'do
  exhaustion         | _ellaciĝo_              | ellaht-see'jo
  to faint           | _sveni_                 | sveh'nee
  fainting           | _sveno_                 | sveh'no
  fever              | _febro_                 | feh'bro
  fit                | _atako (epilepsia)_     | ah-tah'ko
                     |                         |   (eh-peelep-see'ah)
  fracture           | _ostrompo_              | ost-rohm'po
  gout               | _podagro_               | po-dah'gro
  headache           | _kapdoloro_             | kahp-dolohr'o
  hospital           | _hospitalo_             | hospit-ah'lo
  ill, sick          | _malsana_               | mahl-sah'nah
  indigestion        | _dispepsio_             | dis-pep-see'o
  inflammation       | _inflamo_               | inflah'mo
  lame               | _lama_                  | lah'ma
  medicine           | _medicino_              | med-eet-see'no
  nurse              | _flegistino_            | fleh-ghis-tee'no
  ointment           | _ungvento_              | oong-vehn'toh
  operation          | _operacio_              | oh-peh-raht-see'o
  pain               | _doloro_                | doh-lohr'o
  paralysis          | _paralizo_              | pa-rah-lee'zo
  physician          | _medicinisto_           | mehdit-seen-eest'o
  pill               | _pilolo_                | pee-lo'lo
  poison             | _veneno_                | veh-neh'no
  poultice           | _kataplasmo_            | kah-tah-plahs'mo
  prescription       | _recepto_               | reht-sep'toh
  rest               | _ripozado_              | ree-po-zah'doh
  scald              | _brogo_                 | broh'go
  sea-sickness       | _marmalsano_            | mahr-mahl-sah'no
  sprain             | _tordvundo_             | tohrd-voon'doh
  sting              | _pikvundo_              | peek-voon'doh
  tonic              | _stimulilo_             | stimoolee'lo
  unwell, to be      | _farti malbone_         | fahrr'tee mahlbo'neh
  well, to be        | _farti bone_            | fahrr'tee bo'neh
  wound              | _vundo_                 | voon'doh


14. Food & Drink. (_Manĝaĵoj kaj Trinkaĵoj._)

(For Conversations see §§. 48-50.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Appetite           | _apetito_               | ah-peh-tee'toh
  beverages          | _trinkaĵoj_             | trin-kah'zhoy
    beer             | _biero_                 | bee-ehr'o
    chocolate        | _ĉokolado_              | cho-ko-lah'doh
    cocoa            | _kakao_                 | kah-kah'o
    coffee           | _kafo_                  | kah'fo
    lemonade         | _citronakvo_            | tsee-trohn-ahk'vo
    milk             | _lakto_                 | lahk'toh
    soda water       | _sodakvo_               | sohd-ahk'vo
    tea              | _teo_                   | teh'o
    water            | _akvo_                  | ahk'vo
    wine             | _vino_                  | vee'no
  bill-of-fare       | _manĝokarto_            | mahn'jo-kahr'toh
  biscuits           | _biskvitoj_             | bisk-vee'toy
  bread              | _pano_                  | pah'no
    brown bread      | _bruna pano_            | broo'nah pah'no
    new bread        | _freŝa pano_            | freh'shah pah'no
    stale bread      | _malfreŝa pano_         | mahl-freh'shah pah'no
    rolls            | _bulkoj_                | bool'koy
    hot roll         | _varma bulko_           | vahr'mah bool'ko
  boiled             | _bolkuirita_            | bohl'koo-eeree'tah
  bottle             | _botelo_                | boh-teh'lo
  butter             | _butero_                | boo-tehr'o
  cake               | _kuko_                  | koo'ko
  cheese             | _fromaĝo_               | fro-mah'jo
  chicken            | _kokidaĵo_              | koh-keed-ah'zho
  cinnamon           | _cinamo_                | tsee-nah'mo
  cooked; un-        | _kuirita; ne-_          | koo-eeree'tah; neh-
  cream              | _kremo_                 | kreh'mo
  custard            | _flano_                 | flah'no
  dessert            | _deserto_               | deh-sehr'toh
  eggs               | _ovoj_                  | oh'voy
  fish, dried        | _sekigita fiŝo_         | seh-kee-ghee'tah
                     |                         |   fee'sho
  --, fresh          | _freŝa fiŝo_            | freh'shah fee'sho
  flour              | _faruno_                | fah-roo'no
  fowl               | _kokaĵo_                | koh-kah'zho
  fruits             | _fruktoj_               | frook'toy
  ginger             | _zingibro_              | zin-ghee'bro
  honey              | _mielo_                 | mee-eh'lo
  hunger             | _malsato_               | mahl-sah'toh
  ice, an            | _glaciaĵo_              | glahtsee-ah'zho
  jam, preserve      | _konfitaĵo_             | konfee-tah'zho
  marmalade          | _marmelado_             | mahr-meh-lah'do
  meals              | _manĝoj_                | mahn'joy
    breakfast        | _matenmanĝo_            | maht-ehn-mahn'jo
    dinner           | _ĉefmanĝo_              | chehf-mahn'jo
    luncheon         | _lunĉo_                 | loon'cho
    tea              | _teomanĝo_              | teh'o-mahn'jo
    supper           | _vespermanĝo_           | vespehr-mahn'jo
  meat               | _viando_                | vee-ahn'doh
    bacon            | _lardo_                 | lahr'doh
    beef             | _bovaĵo_                | bo-vah'zho
    beefsteak        | _bifsteko_              | beef-steh'ko
    fat              | _graso_                 | grah'so
    ham              | _ŝinko_                 | sheen'ko
    kidneys          | _renoj_                 | reh'noy
    lamb             | _ŝafidaĵo_              | shah-feedah'zho
    lean             | _malgraso_              | mahl-grah'so
    mutton           | _ŝafaĵo_                | shah-fah'zho
    mutton cutlet    | _ŝafkotletoj_           | shahf'kot-leh'toy
    pork             | _porkaĵo_               | pohrr-kah'zho
    sausage          | _kolbaso_               | kohl-bah'so
    veal             | _bovidaĵo_              | bo-veed-ah'zho
  mustard            | _mustardo_              | moos-tahr'doh
  oil                | _oleo_                  | o-leh'o
  omelet, an         | _omeleto_               | oh-meh-leh'toh
  pancake            | _krespo_                | kreh'spo
  pastry             | _kukaĵoj_               | koo-kah'zhoy
  pepper             | _pipro_                 | pee'pro
  pie                | _pasteĉo_               | pahs-teh'cho
  poultry            | _kortbirdaĵo_           | kort-beerr-dah'zho
  pudding            | _pudingo_               | poo-deen'go
  rice               | _rizo_                  | ree'zo
  roast(ed)          | _rostita_               | roh-stee'tah
  salad              | _salato_                | sah-laht'o
  salt               | _salo_                  | sah'lo
  sauce, gravy       | _saŭco_                 | sahwt'so
  smoking            | _fumado_                | foo-mah'doh
    cigar            | _cigaro_                | tsee-gahr'o
    cigarette        | _cigaredo_              | tsee-gahr-eh'doh
    matches          | _alumetoj_              | ahloo-meh'toy
    pipe             | _pipo_                  | pee'po
    tobacco          | _tabako_                | tah-bah'ko
    tobacco-pouch    | _tabakujo_              | tah-bah-koo'yo
  soup               | _supo_                  | soo'po
  sugar              | _sukero_                | soo-kehr'o
  sweets             | _dolĉaĵoj_              | dohl-chah'zhoy
  thirst             | _soifo_                 | so-eef'o
  toothpick          | _dentpurigilo_          | dent'pooree-ghee'lo
  under-done         | _ne elkuirita_          | neh elkoo-eeree'tah
  vegetables         | _legomoj_               | leh-go'moy
  vinegar            | _vinagro_               | vee-nah'gro
  well-done          | _elkuirita_             | el-koo-eeree'tah


15. Cooking & Table Utensils. (_Kuiraj kaj Manĝaj Iloj._)

(For Conversations See §§. 48-50.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Basin              | _pelvo_                 | pehl'vo
  coffee-pot         | _kafpoto_               | kahf-po'toh
  corkscrew          | _korktirilo_            | kork-teeree'lo
  cruet-stand        | _kondimentujo_          | kondimehntoo'yo
  cup                | _taso_                  | tah'so
  decanter           | _karafo_                | kah-rah'fo
  dish               | _plado_                 | plah'do
  dish-cover         | _pladkovrilo_           | plahd'ko-vree'lo
  filter             | _filtrilo_              | fil-tree'lo
  fork               | _forko_                 | fohrr'ko
  frying-pan         | _pato_                  | pah'toh
  glass, tumbler     | _glaso_                 | glah'so
  grill              | _rostokrado_            | ro'sto-krah'doh
  jug                | _kruĉo_                 | kroo'cho
  kettle             | _bolilo_                | bo-lee'lo
  knife              | _tranĉilo_              | trahn-chee'lo
  lid                | _kovrilo_               | ko-vree'lo
  mat                | _mato_                  | mah'toh
  nut-crackers       | _nuksrompilo_           | nooks-rompee'lo
  oven               | _bakforno_              | bahk-fohr'no
  plate              | _telero_                | teleh'ro
  salt-cellar        | _salujo_                | sah-loo'yo
  saucepan           | _kaserolo_              | kah-sehr-oh'lo
  saucer             | _tastelero_             | tahss-teleh'ro
  serviette          | _buŝtuko_               | boosh-too'ko
  (soup-)ladle       | _(sup)kulerego_         | (soop')koo-lehr-eh'go
  spoon              | _kulero_                | koo-leh'ro
  stove              | _forno_                 | fohrr'no
  strainer           | _kribrokulero_          | kree'bro-koo-leh'ro
  table-cloth        | _tablotuko_             | tah'blo-too'ko
  teapot             | _te-poto_               | teh-po'toh
  tea-spoon          | _te-kulero_             | teh-kooleh'ro
  tray               | _pleto_                 | pleh'toh
  water-bottle       | _akvokarafo_            | ahk'vo-karah'fo
  wine-glass         | _vinglaso_              | veen-glah'so


16. Dress & the Toilet. (_La Vestoj kaj la Tualeto._)

(See also Washing List, following, and Conversations §. 53-56.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Bath               | _bano_                  | bah'no
  bodice             | _korsaĵo_               | kor-sah'zho
  bonnet             | _kufo_                  | koo'fo
  bootlaces          | _laĉoj_                 | lah'choy
  boots              | _botoj_                 | bo'toy
  bow                | _banto_                 | bahn'toh
  bracelet           | _braceleto_             | braht-seh-leht'o
  braces             | _ŝelko_                 | shehl'ko
  breeches           | _pantaloneto_           | pahn-tah-lo-neh'toh
  brooch             | _broĉo_                 | bro'cho
  brush              | _broso_                 | bro'so
  brush, clothes-    | _vestbroso_             | vest-bro'so
  --, nail-          | _ungobroso_             | oon'go-bro'so
  --, tooth-         | _dentbroso_             | dent-bro'so
  buckle             | _buko_                  | boo'ko
  button             | _butono_                | boo-to'no
  button-hook        | _butontirilo_           | boo-tohn'tee-ree'lo
  cap                | _ĉapeto_                | cha-peh'toh
  cloak              | _mantelo_               | mahn-teh'lo
  clothing, dress    | _vestaĵo_               | vestah'zho
  coat               | _vesto_                 | veh'sto
  comb               | _kombilo_               | kohm-bee'lo
  corsets, stays     | _korseto_               | kor-seh'toh
  dress, gown        | _robo_                  | ro'bo
  evening dress      | _frako_                 | frah'ko
  eye-glasses        | _nazumo_                | na-zoo'mo
  frock-coat         | _redingoto_             | red-ingo'toh
  gaiters            | _gamaŝoj_               | gah-mah'shoy
  garters            | _ŝtrumpligiloj_         | shtroom-plee-ghee'loy
  gloves             | _gantoj_                | gahn'toy
  hairpin            | _harpinglo_             | har-peen'glo
  hat                | _ĉapelo_                | chahpeh'lo
  hatpin             | _ĉapelpinglo_           | chapehl-peen'glo
  jacket             | _jako_                  | yah'ko
  jewellery          | _juveloj_               | yoo-veh'loy
  knot               | _nodo_                  | no'do
  linen              | _tolaĵo_                | to-lah'zho
  lining             | _subŝtofo_              | soob-shtoh'fo
  looking-glass,     | _spegulo_               | speh-goo'lo
    mirror           |                         |
  material (dress,   | _ŝtofo_                 | shtoh'fo
    etc.)            |                         |
    calico           | _kalikoto_              | kahlee-ko'toh
    cloth            | _drapo_                 | drah'po
    cotton           | _katuno_                | kahtoo'no
    crape            | _krepo_                 | kreh'po
    flannel          | _flanelo_               | flahneh'lo
    flannelette      | _flaneleto_             | flahneh-leh'toh
    fur              | _pelto_                 | pehl'toh
    lace             | _punto_                 | poon'toh
    leather          | _ledo_                  | leh'doh
    linen            | _tolo_                  | toh'lo
    muslin           | _muslino_               | mooss-lee'no
    print            | _katuno_                | kahtoo'no
    satin            | _atlaso_                | ahtlah'so
    silk             | _silko_                 | seel'ko
    velvet           | _veluro_                | vel-oor'o
    velveteen        | _felpo_                 | fehl'po
    wool             | _lano_                  | lah'no
  morning-coat       | _ĵako_                  | zhah'ko
  muff               | _mufo_                  | moo'fo
  needle             | _kudrilo_               | koo-dree'lo
  overcoat           | _palto_                 | pahl'toh
  parasol            | _sunombrelo_            | soon-ombreh'lo
  petticoat          | _subjupo_               | soob-yoo'po
  pins               | _pingloj_               | peen'gloy
  pocket             | _poŝo_                  | po'sho
  pocket-book        | _poŝlibro_              | pohsh-lee'bro
  purse              | _monujo_                | mo-noo'yo
  razor              | _razilo_                | rahzee'lo
  ribbon             | _rubando_               | roo-bahn'doh
  ring               | _ringo_                 | reen'go
  scissors           | _tondilo_               | tohndee'loh
  sewing-cotton      | _kotonfadeno_           | ko-tohn'fah-deh'no
  sewing-silk        | _silkfadeno_            | silk-fahdeh'no
  shawl              | _ŝalo_                  | shah'lo
  shoe-horn          | _ŝukorno_               | shoo-kohr'no
  shoes              | _ŝuoj_                  | shoo'oy
  skirt              | _jupo_                  | yoo'po
  sleeve             | _maniko_                | mah-nee'ko
  slippers           | _pantofloj_             | pahn-toh'floy
  soap               | _sapo_                  | sah'po
  spectacles         | _okulvitroj_            | okool-vee'troy
  sponge             | _spongo_                | spohn'go
  stud               | _kolumbutono_           | koloom'boo-toh'no
  suit (clothes)     | _kompleto_              | kom-pleh'toh
  tape               | _rubandeto_             | roobahn-deh'toh
  thimble            | _fingringo_             | fin-green'go
  thread             | _fadeno_                | fah-deh'no
  tie, neck-tie      | _kravato_               | krah-vah'toh
  tooth-powder       | _dentpulvoro_           | dent-pool-vo'ro
  trousers           | _pantalono_             | pahn-tahlo'no
  tunic              | _tuniko_                | too-nee'ko
  umbrella           | _pluvombrelo_           | ploov-ombreh'lo
  veil               | _vualo_                 | voo-ah'lo
  waistcoat          | _veŝto_                 | vesh'toh
  walking-stick      | _irbastono_             | eer-bah-sto'no
  watch              | _poŝhorloĝo_            | pohsh-horlo'jo
  waterproof (coat)  | _pluvmantelo_           | ploov-mahn-teh'lo


17. Washing List. (_Lavlisto._)

(For Conversations see §. 56.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Aprons             | _antaŭtukoj_            | ahn'tahw-too'koy
  blankets           | _lanaj litkovriloj_     | lah'nahy
                     |                         |   leet'ko-vree'loy
  blouses            | _bluzoj_                | bloo'zoy
  bodices            | _korsaĵoj_              | kohr-sah'zhoy
  chemises           | _ĉemizoj virinaj_       | cheh-mee'zoy
                     |                         |   vee-reen'ahy
  collars, lace      | _puntaj kolumoj_        | poon'tahy ko-loo'moy
  collars, linen     | _tolaj kolumoj_         | to'lahy ko-loo'moy
  combinations       | _kombinaĵoj_            | kom-been-ah'zhoy
  cuffs              | _manumoj_               | mah-noo'moy
  drawers, pairs of  | _kalsonoj_              | kahl-so'noy
  dresses            | _roboj_                 | ro'boy
  dressing-gowns     | _negliĝroboj_           | neh-gleej-ro'boy
  dusters            | _viŝtukoj_              | veesh-too'koy
  handkerchiefs,     | _naztukoj_              | nahz-too'koy
    pocket           |                         |
  --, silk           | _silkaj naztukoj_       | seel'kahy nahz-too'koy
  napkins (child's)  | _tuketoj_               | tookeh'toy
  neckties           | _kravatoj_              | krahvah'toy
  night-shirts,      | _noktoĉemizoj_          | nok'toh-cheh-mee'zoy
    -dresses         |                         |
  flannel petticoats | _flanelaj subjupoj_     | flaneh'lahy soobyoo'poy
  pillow-cases       | _kapkuseningoj_         | kahp'koo-seh-neen'goy
  pinafores          | _antaŭtuketoj_          | ahn'tahw-too-keh'toy
  pyjamas (suits)    | _piĝamoj_               | pee-jah'moy
  serviettes         | _buŝtukoj_              | boosh-too'koy
  sheets             | _littukoj_              | leet-too'koy
  shirts             | _ĉemizoj viraj_         | cheh-mee'zoy veer'ahy
  sleeves            | _manikoj_               | mah-nee'koy
  socks              | _ŝtrumpetoj_            | shtroom-peh'toy
  stockings          | _ŝtrumpoj_              | shtroom'poy
  silk stockings     | _silkaj ŝtrumpoj_       | seel'kahy shtroom'poy
  table-cloths       | _tablotukoj_            | tah'blo-too'koy
  towels             | _manviŝiloj_            | mahn-vee-shee'loy
  under-vests        | _kamizoloj_             | kah-mee-zo'loy
  waistcoats         | _veŝtoj_                | vesh'toy
  --, flannel        | _flanelaj veŝtoj_       | fla-neh'lahy vesh'toy


18. The House and Furniture. (_La Domo kaj la Meblaro._)

(For Shopping see §. 53.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Ante-room          | _antaŭĉambro_           | ahn'tahw-chahm'bro
  armchair           | _brakseĝo_              | brahk-seh'jo
  ashes              | _cindro_                | tseen'dro
  ash-pan            | _cindrujo_              | tsin-droo'yo
  attic              | _mansardo_              | mahn-sahrr'doh
  basket             | _korbo_                 | kohrr'bo
  bathroom           | _banĉambro_             | bahn-chahm'bro
  bedstead, bed      | _lito_                  | lee'toh
  bedroom            | _dormoĉambro_           | dohr'mo-chahm'bro
  bell               | _sonorilo_              | so-no-ree'lo
  blind              | _rulkurteno_            | rool-koor-teh'no
  bolster            | _transkuseno_           | trahns-koo-seh'no
  bolt               | _riglilo_               | reeglee'lo
  book               | _libro_                 | lee'bro
  book-case          | _libroŝranko_           | lee'bro-shrahn'ko
  book-shelf         | _librobreto_            | lee'bro-breh'toh
  box                | _skatolo_               | skah-toh'lo
  bracket            | _krampobreto_           | krahmpo-breh'toh
  brick              | _briko_                 | bree'ko
  broom              | _balailo_               | ba-la-ee'lo
  burner             | _flamingo_              | flah-meen'go
  candle             | _kandelo_               | kahn-deh'lo
  candlestick        | _kandelingo_            | kahn-deh-leen'go
  carpet             | _tapiŝo_                | tah-pee'sho
  ceiling            | _plafono_               | plah-fo'no
  cellar             | _kelo_                  | keh'lo
  chair, seat        | _seĝo_                  | seh'jo
  chamber-utensil    | _necesujo_              | neht-seh-soo'yo
  chandelier, lustre | _lustro_                | loo'stro
  chest of drawers   | _tirkestaro_            | teer'kest-ah'ro
  clock              | _horloĝo_               | hohrr-lo'jo
  coals              | _karbo_                 | kahrr'bo
  couch              | _kanapo_                | kah-nah'po
  counterpane        | _litkovrilo_            | leet'ko-vree'lo
  court-yard         | _korto_                 | kohr'toh
  cradle             | _lulilo_                | loo-lee'lo
  cupboard           | _ŝranko_                | shrahn'ko
  curtain            | _kurteno_               | koor-teh'no
  cushion            | _kuseno_                | koo-seh'no
  dining-room        | _manĝoĉambro_           | mahn'jo-chahm'bro
  dinner-waggon      | _telertablo_            | telehr-tah'blo
  door               | _pordo_                 | pohrr'doh
  door-handle        | _anso_                  | ahn'so
  drawing-room       | _akcepta salono_        | ahk-tsep'tah sah-lo'no
  dresser            | _telermeblo_            | telehr-meh'blo
  feather-bed        | _plumlito_              | ploom-lee'toh
  fender             | _fajrbarilo_            | fire-bah-ree'lo
  fire               | _fajro_                 | fah'y-ro (fire-oh)
  fire-place         | _fajrejo_               | fahy-reh'yo
  flame              | _flamo_                 | flah'mo
  floor              | _planko_                | plahn'ko
  floor, story       | _etaĝo_                 | ehtah'jo
  footstool          | _skabelo_               | skah-beh'lo
  furniture, piece   | _meblo_                 | meh'blo
    of               |                         |
  garden             | _ĝardeno_               | jahr-deh'no
  gas                | _gaso_                  | gah'so
  gas-bracket        | _gas-brako_             | gahss-brah'ko
  grate              | _fajrujo_               | fahy-roo'yo
  hall (entrance)    | _vestiblo_              | vestee'blo
  hand-basin         | _lavujo_                | lah-voo'yo
  (hearth-)rug       | _(kamen)tapiŝeto_       | (kah-mehn')
                     |                         |   tah-pee-sheh'toh
  house              | _domo_                  | doh'mo
  key                | _ŝlosilo_               | shlo-see'lo
  kitchen            | _kuirejo_               | koo-ee-reh'yo
  lamp               | _lampo_                 | lahm'po
  landing            | _etaĝ-placeto_          | ehtahj'plaht'seh'toh
  larder             | _manĝaĵejo_             | mahn-jah-zheh'yo
  latch              | _levriglilo_            | lehv-reeglee'lo
  library            | _biblioteko_            | bib-lee-o-teh'ko
  linoleum           | _linolo_                | lee-no'lo
  lock               | _seruro_                | seh-roo'ro
  mantel-piece       | _kamenbreto_            | kah-mehn'breh'toh
  mat                | _mato_                  | mah'toh
  mattress           | _matraco_               | maht-raht'so
  oil-cloth          | _vakstolo_              | vahks-toh'lo
  ornament           | _ornamo_                | ohr-nah'mo
  passage            | _trairejo_              | trah-eer-eh'yo
  piano              | _fortepiano_            | fohrr-teh-pee-ah'no
  picture            | _bildo_                 | beel'doh
  pillow             | _kapkuseno_             | kahp'koo-seh'no
  poker              | _fajrincitilo_          | fire-int-sit-ee'lo
  porch              | _portiko_               | pohr-tee'ko
  rack (for dishes,  | _raŭfo_                 | rahw'fo
    &c.)             |                         |
  roof               | _tegmento_              | teg-mehn'toh
  room               | _ĉambro_                | chahm'bro
  screen             | _skreno_                | skreh'no
  scullery           | _vazlavejo_             | vahz'lah-veh'yo
  shovel             | _ŝovelilo_              | sho-veh-lee'lo
  sideboard          | _bufedo_                | boo-feh'do
  sink               | _pladlavujo_            | plahd-lah-voo'yo
  smoke              | _fumo_                  | foo'mo
  sofa               | _sofo_                  | so'fo
  soot               | _fulgo_                 | fool'go
  spark              | _fajrero_               | fahy-reh'ro
  staircase          | _ŝtuparo_               | shtoo-pahr'o
  stairs, steps      | _la ŝtupoj_             | lah shtoo'poy
  suite (of rooms)   | _apartamento_           | ahpahrr-tah-mehn'toh
  table              | _tablo_                 | tah'blo
  tapestry           | _tapeto_                | tah-peh'toh
  tile (of roof)     | _tegolo_                | teh-go'lo
  umbrella-stand     | _ombrelujo_             | ohm-breh-loo'yo
  vase               | _vazo_                  | vah'zo
  wall               | _muro_                  | moo'ro
  wall-paper         | _murpapero_             | moor-pa-peh'roh
  water-closet       | _necesejo_              | neht-seh-seh'yo
    (w.c.)           |                         |
  window             | _fenestro_              | fen-eh'stro
  writing-desk       | _pupitro_               | poo-pee'tro


19. Travelling: By Road & Rail. (_La Vojaĝado: per Vojo kaj Fervojo._)

(For Conversations, see §. 42.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Arrival            | _alveno_                | ahl-veh'no
  bill               | _kalkulo_               | kahl-koo'lo
  booking-office     | _biletejo_              | beeleht-eh'yo
  box (of carriage)  | _kondukseĝo_            | kondook-seh'jo
  brake              | _bremso_                | brehm'so
  bridle             | _brido_                 | bree'doh
  cabman, coachman   | _veturigisto_           | vehtoo-ree-ghist'o
  carriage           | _kaleŝo_                | kahleh'sho
  change, to         | _vagonŝanĝi_            | vah-gohn-shahn'jee
  cloak-room         | _deponejo_              | deh-po-neh'yo
  coach              | _diliĝenco_             | dee-lee-jehnt'so
  coffee-room        | _kafejo_                | kah-feh'yo
  communication-cord | _danĝerŝnuro_           | dahn-jehr-shnoor'o
  compartment        | _kupeo_                 | koo-peh'o
  conductor          | _konduktoro_            | kon-dooktoh'ro
  cushion            | _kuseno_                | koo-seh'no
  custom-house       | _dogano_                | doh-gah'no
  custom-house       | _doganisto_             | doh-gah-nist'o
    officer          |                         |
  departure          | _ekveturo_              | ek-vehtoo'ro
  electric,          | _elektra_               | eh-lehk'tra
    electrical       |                         |
  electricity        | _elektro_               | eh-lehk'tro
  embankment (rail.) | _taluso_                | tah-loo'so
  engine             | _lokomotivo_            | lo-komo-tee'vo
  entrance           | _enirejo_               | eneer-eh'yo
  excursion          | _ekskurso_              | eks-koorr'so
  exit               | _elirejo_               | ehleer-eh'yo
  express (train)    | _ekspreso_              | eks-preh'so
  fare               | _veturprezo_            | vehtoor-preh'zo
  fast train         | _rapidira vagonaro_     | rahpee-dee'rah
                     |                         |   vahgo-nah'ro
  foot-warmer        | _piedvarmigilo_         | pee-ehd'vahrmee-ghee'lo
  full               | _plena_                 | pleh'na
  guide              | _gvidisto_              | gvee-dist'o
  guide-book         | _gvidlibro_             | gveed'lee'bro
  hansom-cab         | _fiakro_                | fee-ah'kro
  hat-box            | _ĉapelujo_              | chah-peh-loo'yo
  hotel              | _hotelo_                | ho-teh'lo
  inside (of         | _interno_               | in-tehr'no
    vehicle)         |                         |
  interpreter        | _interpretisto_         | intehr-preh-tist'o
  journey            | _vojaĝo_                | vo-yah'jo
  journey (train,    | _veturo_                | vehtoo'ro
    etc.)            |                         |
  junction           | _vojkuniĝo_             | voy'koonee'jo
  key                | _ŝlosilo_               | shlo-see'lo
  label              | _etikedo_               | eh-tikeh'doh
  landlady           | _mastrino_              | mah-stree'no
  landlord           | _mastro_                | mah'stro
  lavatory           | _lavejo_                | lah-veh'yo
  lodging            | _loĝejo_                | lo-jeh'yo
  luggage            | _pakaĵoj_               | pah-kah'zhoy
  motor              | _motoro_                | mo-tohr'o
  motor 'bus         | _motorbuso_             | mo-tohr-boo'so
  motor-car          | _aŭtomobilo_            | ahw-toh-mo-bee'lo
  omnibus            | _omnibuso_              | omnee-boo'so
  outside (of        | _imperialo_             | impeh-ree-ah'lo
    vehicle)         |                         |
  package            | _pakaĵo_                | pah-kah'zho
  payment            | _pago_                  | pah'go
  platform           | _fervoja perono_        | fehr-vo'yah peh-ro'no
  porter             | _portisto_              | pohr-tist'o
  portmanteau        | _valizo_                | vah-lee'zo
  rack (for parcels, | _raŭfo_                 | rah'w-fo
    &c.)             |                         |
  railway            | _fervojo_               | fehr-vo'jo
  railway-carriage   | _vagono_                | vah-go'no
  railway-station    | _fervoja stacio_        | fehr-vo'yah
                     |                         |   staht-see'oh
  receipt            | _kvitanco_              | kvitahnt'so
  reins              | _kondukiloj,            | kondoo-kee'loy,
                     |   gvidrimenoj_          |   gveed'ri-meh'noy
  reserved           | _rezervita_             | rehzehr-vee'ta
  rug                | _tegilo_                | teh-ghee'lo
  saddle             | _selo_                  | seh'lo
  seat               | _loko_                  | lo'ko
  signal             | _signalo_               | seeg-nah'lo
  start, the         | _la ekveturo_           | la ek-veh-too'ro
  station-master     | _staciestro_            | staht-see-est'ro
  strap              | _rimeno_                | ree-meh'no
  terminus           | _finstacio_             | feen-staht-see'oh
  ticket             | _bileto_                | beeleh'toh
  time-table         | _veturhoraro_           | vehtoor'horah'ro
  tour               | _rondvojaĝo_            | rohnd-voyah'jo
  tourist            | _turist-o, -ino_        | toor-ist'o, -ee'no
  track              | _relvojo_               | rehl-vo'yo
  train              | _vagonaro_              | vah-go-nah'ro
  tram-car           | _tramveturilo_          | trahm'vehtoor-ee'lo
  tramway            | _tramvojo_              | trahm-vo'yo
  travel, to (train, | _veturi_                | vehtoo'ree
    &c.)             |                         |
  trunk              | _kofro_                 | ko'fro
  tube (railway)     | _tubfervojo_            | toob-fehr-vo'yo
  tunnel             | _tunelo_                | too-neh'lo
  underground        | _subtera_               | soob-teh'rah
  valise, hand-bag   | _valizeto_              | vah-leezeh'toh
  waiter             | _kelnero_               | kel-nehr'o
  waiting-room       | _atendejo_              | ahtehn-deh'yo


20. Travelling: by Ship. (_Marveturado._)

(For Conversations see §. 43.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Alongside, to come | _albordiĝi_             | ahlbohrdee'jee
  anchor             | _ankro_                 | ahn'kro
  berth              | _dormujo_               | dorr-moo'yo
  boat               | _boato_                 | bo-ah'toh
  boiler             | _kaldrono_              | kahl-dro'no
  bow                | _antaŭo_                | antah'wo
  buoy               | _buo_                   | boo'oh
  cabin              | _kajuto_                | kah-yoo'toh
  cable              | _kablo_                 | kah-blo
  captain            | _kapitano_              | kahpee-tah'no
  compass            | _kompaso_               | kom-pah'so
  crane              | _argano_                | ahrrgah'no
  crew               | _ŝipanaro_              | sheepah-nah'ro
  deck               | _ferdeko_               | fehr-deh'ko
  disembark          | _elŝipiĝi_              | el-shipee'jee
  dock               | _doko_                  | do'ko
  to embark          | _enŝipiĝi_              | en-shipee'jee
  engineer           | _maŝinisto_             | mahshee-nist'o
  fishing-boat       | _fiŝbarko_              | feesh-bahr'ko
  flag               | _flago_                 | flah'go
  gangway            | _pasponteto_            | pahss'pon-teh'toh
  harbour, port      | _haveno_                | hahveh'no
  helm, rudder       | _direktilo_             | deerek-tee'lo
  hold               | _holdo_                 | hohl'do
  to land            | _surteriĝi_             | soortehr-ee'jee
  landing-stage,     | _enŝipiĝejo_            | en-shipee-jeh'yo
    pier             |                         |
  life-belt          | _savzono_               | sahv-zo'no
  life-boat          | _savŝipo_               | sahv-shee'po
  lighthouse         | _lumturo_               | loom-toor'o
  mast               | _masto_                 | mah'sto
  oar                | _remilo_                | reh-mee'lo
  paddle-wheel       | _padelrado_             | pah-dehl-rah'doh
  passenger          | _pasaĝero_              | pah-sah-jehr'o
  pilot              | _piloto_                | pee-loh'toh
  port-hole          | _fenestreto_            | fehneh-streh'toh
  quay               | _kajo_                  | kah'yo
  rope               | _ŝnuro_                 | shnoor'o
  sail               | _velo_                  | veh'lo
  sailing-ship       | _velŝipo_               | vehl-shee'po
  saloon, first      | _unua klaso_            | oonoo'ah klah'so
    class            |                         |
  screw-propeller    | _pelŝraŭbo, helico_     | pehl-shrahw'bo,
                     |                         |   heh-leet'so
  seaman, sailor     | _maristo_               | mahr-ist'o
  ship               | _ŝipo_                  | shee'po
  start, to          | _ekveturi_              | ek-vehtoor'ee
  steam-boat, -ship  | _vaporŝipo_             | vahpohr-shee'po
  steerage, third    | _tria klaso_            | tree'ah klah'so
    class            |                         |
  steersman          | _direktilisto_          | deerek-tee-list'o
  stern              | _posto_                 | post'o
  steward            | _provizisto_            | pro-vee-zist'o
  stewardess         | _servistino_            | sehr-vis-tee'no
  tug                | _trenŝipo_              | trehn-shee'po
  voyage             | _vojaĝo_                | vo-yah'jo


21. Countries & Nations.[4] (_Landoj kaj Nacioj._)


  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Africa             | _Afriko_                | ah-free'ko
  America            | _Ameriko_               | ah-mehree'ko
  American           | _Amerikano_             | ah-mehree-kah'no
  Asia               | _Azio_                  | ah-zee'oh
  Australia          | _Aŭstralio_             | ahw-strahlee'oh
  Austria            | _Aŭstrio_               | ahw-stree'oh
  Belgium            | _Belgujo_               | belhgoo'yo
  Canada             | _Kanado_                | kahnah'doh
  China              | _Ĥinujo_                | _kh_eenoo'yo
  Chinese, the       | _la Ĥinoj_              | la _kh_ee'noy
  Denmark            | _Danujo_                | dahnoo'yo
  Dutchman           | _Holandano_             | holahn-dah'no
  empire             | _imperio_               | impeh-ree'oh
  England            | _Anglujo_               | ahn-gloo'yo
  English, the       | _la Angloj_             | la ahn'gloy
  Englishman         | _Anglo_                 | ahn'glo
  Europe             | _Eŭropo_                | ehw-ro'po
  France             | _Francujo_              | frahnt-soo'yo
  French, the        | _la Francoj_            | la frahnt'soy
  Frenchman          | _Franco_                | frahnt'so
  German             | _Germano_               | ghehrr-mah'no
  Germany            | _Germanujo_             | ghehrr-mahnoo'yo
  Holland            | _Holando_               | holahn'doh
  India              | _Indio_                 | indee'oh
  Ireland            | _Irlando_               | eerrlahn'doh
  Irish, the         | _la Irlandanoj_         | la eerrlahn-dah'noy
  Irishman           | _Irlandano_             | eerlahn-dah'no
  Italian            | _Italo_                 | eetah'lo
  Italy              | _Italujo_               | eetahloo'yo
  Japan              | _Japanujo_              | yah-pahnoo'yo
  Japanese, the      | _la Japanoj_            | la yahpah'noy
  kingdom            | _regno_                 | rehg'no
  Norway             | _Norvegujo_             | norrveh-goo'yo
  republic           | _respubliko_            | rehspooblee'ko
  Russia             | _Rusujo_                | roosoo'yo
  Scotland           | _Skotujo_               | sko-too'yo
  Scotch, the        | _la Skotoj_             | la sko'toy
  Scotchman          | _Skoto_                 | sko'to
  Spain              | _Hispanujo_             | hispah-noo'yo
  United States, the | _la Unuigitaj Ŝtatoj_   | la oonooee-ghee'tahy
                     |                         |   shtah'toy
  Sweden             | _Svedujo_               | svehdoo'yo
  Switzerland        | _Svisujo_               | svisoo'yo
  Turkey             | _Turkujo_               | toorkoo'yo
  Wales              | _Kimrujo_               | kimroo'yo
  Welsh, the         | _la Kimroj_             | la kim'roy


22. Recreation and Amusement. (_La Ludado kaj Amuzado._)

(For Conversations see §. 57.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Ball (dance)       | _balo_                  | bah'lo
  balloon            | _balono_                | bahloh'no
    balloonist       | _aerostatisto_          | ah-ehro-stah-tist'o
  circus             | _cirko_                 | tseerr'ko
  concert            | _koncerto_              | kont-sehr'toh
    accompanist      | _akompanist-o, -ino_    | ahkompah-nist'o, -ee'no
    audience         | _aŭdantaro_             | ahwdahn-tah'ro
    bass             | _baso_                  | bah'so
    chorus (singers) | _ĥoro_                  | _kh_oh'ro
    conductor        | _orkestrestro_          | orkest-rest'ro
    instruments      | _instrumentoj_          | instroo-mehn'toy
    --, brass        | _latunaj instrumentoj_  | lah-too'nahy
                     |                         |   instroo-mehn'toy
    --, reed         | _anĉinstrumentoj_       | ahnch'instroo-mehn'toy
    --, string       | _kordinstrumentoj_      | kohrrd'instroomehn'toy
    music            | _muziko_                | moo-zee'ko
    organ            | _orgeno_                | ohr-geh'no
    pianist          | _fortepianist-o, -ino_  | fohr'teh-pee-ahn-
                     |                         |   ist'o, -een'o
    piano            | _fortepiano_            | fohr'teh-pee-ah'no
    programme        | _programo_              | pro-grah'mo
    recital          | _muzika seanco_         | moozee'kah seh-ahnt'so
    recitation       | _deklamo_               | deh-klah'mo
    seats            | _benkoj_                | behn'koy
    --, (un)reserved | _(ne)rezervitaj lokoj_  | (neh)rehzehr-vee'tahy
                     |                         |   lo'koy
    singer           | _kantant-o, -ino_       | kahntahnt'-o, -een'o
    --,              | _kantist-o, -ino_       | kahntist'-o, -een'o
      (professional) |                         |
    solo; duet       | _solo; duo_             | solo; doo'oh
    song             | _kanto_                 | kahn'toh
    soprano          | _soprano_               | so-prah'no
    tenor            | _tenoro_                | teh-nohr'o
    ticket           | _bileto_                | beeleh'toh
    violin           | _violono_               | vee-ohlo'no
  exhibition         | _ekspozicio_            | eks-pozit-see'oh
  fête               | _festo_                 | feh'sto
  flower-show        | _flor-ekspozicio_       | flohr'eks-pozit-see'o
  flying machine     | _aerveturilo_           | ah-ehr'veh-tooree'lo
  limelight-views    | _lumprojekcioj_         | loom'pro-yekt-see'oy
  museum             | _muzeo_                 | moo-zeh'o
  picture-gallery    | _bildogalerio_          | bil'doh-galeh-ree'o
  refreshment-room   | _bufedo_                | boo-feh'doh
  sports and games   | _sportoj kaj ludoj_     | spor'toy kahy loo'doy
    bathing; to      | _banado; bani_          | ba-nah'doh; bah'nee
      bathe          |                         |
    billiards        | _bilardo_               | bilahr'doh
    boating, to go   | _promeni boate_         | pro-meh'nee bo-ah'teh
    box, to          | _boksi_                 | bok'see
    boxing-match     | _vetbokso_              | veht-bok'so
    chess            | _ŝako_                  | shah'ko
    cricket          | _kriketo_               | krikeh'toh
    draughts         | _damoj_                 | dah'moy
    fishing          | _fiŝkaptado_            | fish'kahptah'doh
      to fish        | _fiŝ-kapti_             | fish-kahp'tee
      to go fishing  | _iri fiŝkapti_          | ee'ree fish-kahp'tee
      fishing-line   | _hokfadeno_             | hohk'fahdeh'no
      fishing-net    | _fiŝreto_               | fish-reh'toh
      fishing-rod    | _fiŝkaptilo_            | fish-kahp-tee'lo
    hunting; to hunt | _ĉasado; ĉasi_          | chahsah'doh; chah'see
      fox-hunt       | _vulpĉaso_              | voolp-chah'so
      huntsman       | _ĉasisto_               | chahsist'o
    match            | _vetludo_               | veht-loo'doh
    playing; to play | _ludado; ludi_          | loo-dah'doh; loo'dee
    races            | _ĉevalkuroj_            | chehvahl-koo'roy
      grand-stand    | _ĉeftribuno_            | chehf-triboo'no
      jockey         | _ĵokeo_                 | zho-keh'o
      race-course    | _vetkurejo_             | veht-koo-reh'yo
    rowing; to row   | _remado; remi_          | reh-mah'doh; reh'mee
    shooting         | _pafĉasado_             | pahf-chah-sah'doh
      ammunition     | _municio_               | moonit-see'o
      bullet, ball   | _kuglo_                 | koo'glo
      cartridge      | _kartoĉo_               | kahr-toh'cho
      game-bag       | _ĉasosako_              | chah'so-sah'ko
      gun            | _pafilo_                | pah-fee'lo
      shot           | _pafaĵo_                | pah-fah'zho
      to shoot       | _pafi_                  | pah'fee
    skating; to      | _glitumado; glitumi_    | glitoomah'doh;
      skate          |                         |   glitoo'mee
    spectator        | _spektatoro_            | spek-tah-tohr'o
    swimming; to     | _naĝado; naĝi_          | najah'do; nah'jee
      swim           |                         |
    tennis           | _teniso_                | tehnee'so
    to wrestle       | _lukti_                 | look'tee
  tent               | _tendo_                 | tehn'doh
  theatre            | _teatro_                | teh-ah'tro
    act              | _akto_                  | ahk'toh
    --, to           | _ludi rolon_            | loo'dee ro'lohn
    actor, actress   | _aktoro, aktorino_      | ahktohr'o, ahktoree'no
    auditorium       | _aŭditorio_             | ahw-ditohr-ee'o
    ballet           | _baleto_                | baleh'toh
    boxes            | _loĝioj_                | lo-jee'oy
    box-office       | _lokoficejo_            | loh'ko-fit-seh'yo
    cloak-room       | _deponejo_              | dehponeh'yo
    comedian         | _komediisto_            | komeh-dee-ist'o
    curtain          | _kurteno_               | koor-teh'no
    dance            | _danco_                 | dahnt'so
    dancer           | _dancist-o, -ino_       | dahntsist'-o, -een'o
    exit             | _elirejo_               | ehlee-reh'yo
    footlights       | _planklampoj_           | plahnk-lahm'poy
    gallery          | _galerio_               | galeh-ree'o
    manager          | _direktoro_             | deerektoh'ro
    music-hall       | _muzikhalo_             | moozeek-ha'lo
    opera            | _opero_                 | opeh'ro
    opera-glasses    | _lorno_                 | lohrr'no
    opera-house      | _operejo_               | opeh-reh'yo
    orchestra, band  | _orkestro_              | orkest'ro
    pit              | _partero_               | pahr-tehr'o
    play             | _teatraĵo_              | teh-atrah'zho
    scene            | _sceno_                 | stseh'no
    scenery (theat.) | _scenpentraĵo_          | stsehn-pentrah'zho
    stage            | _scenejo_               | stseh-neh'yo
    stage-manager    | _reĝisoro_              | reh-jee-sohr'o
    stalls           | _foteloj (orkestraj)_   | fo-teh'loy
                     |                         |   (orkest'rahy)

23. Cycling. (_Ciklismo._)

(See also Motoring, following, and Conversations §§. 58-59.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Accessories        | _akcesoraĵoj_           | ahk-tseh-sorah'zhoy
  acetylene          | _acetileno_             | aht-sehtee-leh'no
  axle               | _akso_                  | ahk'so
  back-pedal, to     | _retropedali_           | reh'tro-pehdah'lee
  ball bearings      | _kuglokusenoj_          | koo'glo-koo-seh'noy
  bell               | _tintilo_               | tin-tee'lo
  bicycle            | _biciklo_               | bit-see'klo
  bolt (screw-)      | _bolto_                 | bohl'toh
  brake              | _bremso_                | brehm'so
  cement             | _cemento_               | tseh-mehn'toh
  chain              | _ĉeno_                  | cheh'no
    chainless        | _senĉena_               | sen-cheh'nah
    chain-regulator  | _ĉenĝustigilo_          | chehn'joostig-ee'lo
    chain-wheel      | _granda dentrado_       | grahn'da dent-rah'doh
  clutch             | _konektumo_             | kohnek-too'mo
  cone               | _konuso_                | ko-noo'so
  crank              | _kranko_                | krahn'ko
  crank-pin          | _krankokejlo_           | krahn'ko-keh'y-lo
  crooked            | _malrekta_              | mahlrek'tah
  cycle-shop         | _biciklobutiko_         | bitsee'klo-boo-tee'ko
  cycling race       | _vetbiciklado_          | veht'bitsee-klah'doh
  cycling track      | _bicikla dromo_         | bitsee'klah dro'mo
  cyclist            | _(bi)ciklisto_          | (bee)tsee-klist'o
  lady cyclist       | _(bi)ciklistino_        | (bee)tsee-klist-ee'no
  cyclometer         | _ciklometro_            | tsee-klo-meh'tro
  detachable         | _deprenebla_            | deh-preneh'blah
  dismount, to       | _deseliĝi_              | deh-seh-lee'jee
  dress-guard        | _robŝirmilo_            | rohb'sheer-mee'lo
  duster             | _viŝilo_                | veeshee'lo
  electro-plate, to  | _nikeli_                | neekeh'lee
  enamel, to         | _emajli_                | emah'y-lee
  foot-rests         | _piedapogiloj_          | pee-ehd'apoh-ghee'loy
  foot-step          | _ŝtupo_                 | shtoo'po
  fork               | _forko_                 | fohr-ko
  frame              | _kadro_                 | kah'dro
  free-wheel         | _libera rado_           | leebeh'ra rah'doh
  free-wheel, to     | _liberiri_              | leebeh-ree'ree
  friction           | _frotado_               | fro-tah'doh
  gear               | _rapidumo_              | rahpee-doo'mo
    high gear        | _granda rapidumo_       | grahn'da rahpeedoo'mo
    low gear         | _malgranda rapidumo_    | mahl-grahn'da
                     |                         |   rahpee-doo'mo
    two-speed gear   | _du-rapidumo_           | doo'rahpee-doo'mo
    gear-case        | _ĉenujo_                | cheh-noo'yo
    geared to        | _kun rapidumo de..._    | koon rahpeedoo'mo deh
    gearing          | _dentaĵo_               | dentah'zho
  handle-bar         | _gvidilo_               | gveedee'lo
  handles, grips     | _tenilo_                | teh-nee'lo
  hub                | _aksingo_               | ahk-seen'go
  indiarubber        | _kaŭĉuko_               | kahw-choo'ko
  indiarubber        | _kaŭĉuka solvaĵo_       | kahw-choo'ka
    solution         |                         |   sol-vah'zho
  inner tube         | _interna tubo_          | intehr'nah too'bo
  lamp               | _lanterno_              | lantehr'no
    lamp-bracket     | _lanternhoko_           | lahn-tehrn'ho'ko
    lamp-wick        | _meĉo_                  | meh'cho
  light up, to       | _lumigi_                | loo-mee'ghee
  link               | _ĉenero_                | cheh-neh'ro
  lubricator         | _olekapsulo_            | oleh'kapsoo'lo
  lubricator         | _kapsulkovrilo_         | kapsool'ko-vree'lo
    protector        |                         |
  luggage-carrier    | _pakportilo_            | pahk'pohr-tee'lo
  map                | _landkarto_             | lahnd-kar'toh
  mount, to          | _surseliĝi_             | soor-sehl-ee'jee
  mudguard           | _kotkaptilo_            | koht-kaptee'lo
  nut                | _ŝraŭbingo_             | shrahw-been'go
  nut, safety-       | _fiksa ŝraŭbingo_       | feek'sa shrahw-been'go
  oil for burning    | _lumoleo_               | loom-oleh'o
  --, lubricating    | _ŝmiroleo_              | shmeer-oleh'o
  oil-can            | _oleujeto_              | ohleh-oo-yeh'toh
  outer cover        | _volvaĵo_               | vohl-vah'zho
  pedal              | _pedalo_                | peh-dah'lo
    pedal-rubber     | _pedalkaŭĉuko_          | pedahl'kahw-choo'ko
    pedal-brake      | _pedala bremso_         | peh-dah'la brehm'so
  pneumatic tyre     | _pneŭmatika bendo_      | pnehw-matee'ka behn'doh
  pump               | _pumpilo_               | poom-pee'lo
    pump up, to      | _ŝveligi_               | shveh-leeg'ee
    pump-tube        | _pumpiltubo_            | poom-peel-too'bo
  to put together,   | _munti_                 | moon'tee
    fit up to        |                         |
  rag                | _ĉifono_                | chifo'no
  repair, to         | _ripari_                | ripah'ree
  repairing outfit   | _riparilaro_            | ripah-ree-lah'ro
  ride a bicycle, to | _bicikli_               | bit-see'klee
  rim                | _radrondo_              | rahd-rohn'doh
  rim-brake          | _radronda bremso_       | rahd-rohn'da brehm'so
  rivet              | _vinkto_                | vink'toh
  saddle             | _selo_                  | seh'lo
    saddle-bag       | _selsaketo_             | sehl'sah-keh'toh
    saddle-pillar    | _selkolono_             | sehl-kolo'no
  screw              | _ŝraŭbo_                | shrahw'-bo
    screw, to        | _ŝraŭbi_                | shrahw'-bee
    screw-bolt of    | _ĉenbolto_              | chehn-bohl'toh
      chain          |                         |
    screwdriver      | _ŝraŭbturnilo_          | shrahwb-toor-nee'lo
  spanner            | _ŝraŭbilo_              | shrahw-bee'lo
  spokes             | _radioj_                | rah-dee'oy
  spring             | _risorto_               | risohr'toh
  start, to          | _ekiri_                 | ekeer'ee
  steer, to          | _gvidi_                 | gvee'dee
  strap              | _rimeno_                | reemeh'no
  take to pieces, to | _malmunti_              | mahl-moon'tee
  tighten up, to     | _streĉi_                | streh'chee
  toe-clip           | _piedingo_              | pee-ehd-een'go
  tricycle           | _triciklo_              | tritsee'klo
  trousers-clip      | _pantalonpinĉilo_       | pantalohn'pin-chee'lo
  unscrew, to        | _malŝraŭbi_             | mahl-shrahw'-bee
  valve              | _valvo_                 | vahl'vo
  valve-cap          | _valvkovrilo_           | vahlv'ko-vree'lo
  valve-tubing       | _valvtubaĵo_            | vahlv'too-bah'zho
  wheel, back        | _posta rado_            | po'stah rah'doh
  --, front          | _antaŭa rado_           | antah'wah rah'doh


24. Motoring. (_Aŭtomobilismo._)

(See also Cycling above, and Conversations §. 58-59.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Accumulator        | _akumulatoro_           | ahkoomoo-lahtohr'o
  battery            | _baterio_               | bahteh-ree'oh
  brake-collar       | _bremsorubando_         | brehm'so-roobahn'doh
  break down (stop), | _panei_                 | pahneh'ee
    to               |                         |
  cam                | _kamo_                  | kah'mo
  carburator         | _karburatoro_           | karboo-rahtohr'o
  chain adjustment   | _ĉenĝustigilo_          | chehn-joosti-ghee'lo
  charge, to         | _ŝargi_                 | shahr'ghee
  chassis            | _ĉasio_                 | chah-see'oh
  chauffeur, driver  | _veturigisto_           | vehtoo-reeghist'oh
  claw               | _ungo_                  | oon'go
  contact-breaker    | _kontakt-rompilo_       | kontahkt'-rompee'lo
    (trembler)       |                         |
  driving pinion     | _pelrado_               | pehl-rah'doh
  elbow              | _kubuto_                | kooboo'toh
  electric motor     | _elektra motoro_        | ehlek'tra motohr'o
  evaporate, to      | _vaporiĝi_              | vahpohr-ee'jee
  exhaust            | _gasforfluo_            | gahss-fohrfloo'oh
  exhaust-box        | _silentigujo_           | seelehn-tigoo'yo
    (silencer)       |                         |
  exhaust-valve      | _forflua valvo_         | fohrfloo'ah vahl'vo
  feed-pump          | _nutro-pumpilo_         | noo'tro-poompee'lo
  fill, to           | _plenigi_               | plehnee'ghee
  flaw               | _difektaĵo_             | difek-tah'zho
  fly-wheel          | _inertrado_             | in-ehrt-rah'doh
  garage             | _remizo_                | rehmee'zo
  gas                | _gaso_                  | gah'so
  generator          | _generatoro_            | ghenehrahtohr'o
  goggles            | _okulvitroj_            | okool-vee'troy
  gradient           | _deklivo_               | dehklee'vo
  handle             | _tenilo_                | tehnee'lo
  hooter             | _blekilo_               | blehkee'lo
  horse-power        | _ĉevalpovo_             | chehvahl-po'vo
  ignition           | _ignito, ignitigilo_    | ignee'toh,
                     |                         |   igniteeghee'lo
  leakage            | _ellaso_                | el-lah'so
  lever              | _levilo_                | lehvee'lo
  motor              | _motoro_                | mohtohr'o
  -- car             | _aŭtomobilo_            | ahwtomobee'lo
  -- lamp            | _lanterno_              | lahn-tehr'no
  packing            | _stupo_                 | stoo'po
  petrol             | _petrolo_               | pehtro'lo
  pressure, high     | _altpremo_              | alt-preh'mo
  --, low            | _malaltpremo_           | mahlalt-preh'mo
  rack (lifter)      | _rako_                  | rah'ko
  reservoir, tank    | _rizervujo_             | rizehr-voo'yo
  reversing lever    | _irmaligilo_            | eer'mahleeghee'lo
  spare tyre         | _krom-bendo_            | krohm-behn'doh
  spark              | _sparko_                | spahr'ko
  sparking-plug      | _sparkilo_              | spahrkee'lo
  speed, full        | _plena rapideco_        | pleh'na rahpideht'so
  --, high           | _granda rapideco_       | grahn'da rahpideht'so
  --, low            | _malgranda rapideco_    | mahlgrahn'da
                     |                         |   rapideht'so
  speed-changing     | _rapidŝanĝa mekanismo_  | rahpeed-shahn'jah
    gear             |                         |   mekanis'mo
  starting-gear      | _ekiriga mekanismo_     | ekeeree'gah mekanees'mo
  starting handle    | _ekirigilo_             | eh-keereeghee'lo
  steering bar       | _gvidstango_            | gveed-stahn'go
  tap                | _krano_                 | krah'no
  throw into gear,   | _konekti_               | konek'tee
    to               |                         |
  throw out of gear, | _malkonekti_            | mahlkonek'tee
    to               |                         |


25. Photography. (_La Fotografarto._)

(For Conversations see §. 60.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Amateur            | _amatoro_               | amah-tohr'o
  background         | _fono_                  | fo'no
  --, cloth          | _tola fono_             | toh'la fo'no
  backing paper      | _fonpapero_             | fohn-papehr'o
  bath, positive     | _pozitiva bano_         | pozitee'va bah'no
  --, silver         | _arĝentbano_            | arjehnt-bah'no
  bulb               | _bulbo_                 | bool'bo
  bulging            | _konveksigo_            | konvek-see'go
  burnisher          | _polurilo_              | poloor-ee'lo
  cameo              | _kameo_                 | kameh'o
  camera             | _fotografilo, kamero_   | foto-grafee'lo,
                     |                         |   kameh'ro
  -- bellows         | _balgo_                 | bahl'go
  camera, hand       | _mankamero_             | mahnkamehr'o
  --, stand          | _stativkamero_          | stateev'kamehr'o
  cutting moulds     | _tranĉkalibrilo_        | trahnch'kalibree'lo
  dark-room lamp     | _ruĝa lanterno_         | roo'jah lantehr'no
  dark slide         | _kaseto (duobla)_       | kahseh'toh (doo-oh'bla)
    (double)         |                         |
  developing         | _rivelado_              | reeveh-lah'do
  dipper             | _trempilo_              | trehm-pee'lo
  dishes             | _kuvetoj_               | koo-veh'toy
  -- for developing  | _rivelkuvetoj_          | rivehl'koo-veh'toy
  -- for fixing      | _fikskuvetoj_           | fiks-koo-veh'toy
  -- for toning      | _tonigbanoj_            | toh-neeg-bah'noy
  draining rack      | _sekigilo_              | sekighee'lo
  dry plates         | _sekaj platoj_          | seh'kahy plah'toy
  enlargement        | _pligrandigo_           | plee-grandee'go
  exposure           | _espozo_                | espo'zo
  --, snap           | _momenta espozo_        | momehn'ta espozo
  --, time           | _daŭra espozo_          | dahw'rah espo'zo
  fade, to           | _malnetiĝi_             | mahl-netee'jee
  flash lamp         | _magnezia lumigilo_     | magneh-zee'ah
                     |                         |   loomi-ghee'lo
  films              | _filmoj_                | feel'moy
  fixing             | _fiksado_               | fik-sah'doh
  focus              | _fokuso_                | fo-koo'so
  focus, to          | _enfokusigi_            | enfo-koo-see'ghee
  focussing glasses  | _lupeo_                 | loopeh'o
  funnel             | _funelo_                | fooneh'lo
  glass measure      | _gradigita mezurilo_    | gradee-ghee'ta
                     |                         |   mezoo-ree'lo
  half-length        | _duonlonga_             | doo-ohn-lohn'gah
  half-tone          | _duontono_              | doo-ohn-toh'no
  intensifying       | _densigo_               | den-see'go
  iris diaphragm     | _irisdiafragmo_         | eereess-dee-afrahg'mo
  lens               | _lenso_                 | lehn'so
  --, cap of         | _lenskovrilo_           | lehnss-kovree'lo
  mount, to          | _munti_                 | moon'tee
  negative           | _negativo_              | nehgah-tee'vo
  over-exposed       | _hiperespozita_         | heepehr-espo-zee'ta
  photograph         | _fotografaĵo_           | foto-grafah'zho
  photographer       | _fotografisto_          | foto-grahfist'o
  plate              | _plato_                 | plah'to
  plate-holder       | _platkaseto_            | plaht-kaseh'toh
  plate-lifter       | _platlevilo_            | plaht-leh-vee'lo
  platinotypes       | _platinotipoj_          | plah-teeno-tee'poy
  printing           | _impresi_               | impreh'see
  printing frame     | _premkaseto_            | prehm-kaseh'toh
  printing-out paper | _senrivela papero_      | sen-reeveh'la papeh'ro
  scales and weights | _pesilo kaj peziloj_    | pehsee'loh kahy
                     |                         |   pehzee'loy
  sensitised         | _impresebla_            | impreh-seh'blah
  shutter            | _obturatoro_            | obtoo-rah-tor'o
  snap-shot          | _maldaŭra kapto_        | mahldahw'rah kahp'toh
  speed indicator    | _daŭrindikilo_          | dahw'r-indikee'lo
  spirit-level       | _nivelilo_              | neeveh-lee'lo
  spot, stain        | _makulo_                | makoo'lo
  squeegee           | _senakvigilo_           | sen-ahkvee-gee'lo
  stand              | _stativo_               | statee'vo
  transparent        | _diafana_               | dee-afah'nah
  tripods (twofold)  | _tripiedo (faldebla)_   | tree-pee-eh'doh
                     |                         |   (fahl-deh'bla)
  under-exposed      | _subespozita_           | soob'espo-zee'tah
  varnishing         | _lakizo_                | lah-kee'zoh
  view-finder        | _celilo_                | tseh-lee'lo
  vignetting-board   | _duonombrigilo_         | doo-ohn'ombrighee'lo


26. Religion. (_Religio._)

(For Conversations, see §. 61.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Absolution         | _absolvo_               | absohl'vo
  aisle              | _flanknavo_             | flahnk-nah'vo
  altar              | _altaro_                | altah'ro
  baptism            | _bapto_                 | bahp'toh
  belfry             | _sonorilejo_            | sonoh-reeleh'yo
  Bible              | _Biblio_                | biblee'oh
  breviary           | _breviero_              | brehvee-ehr'o
  burial             | _enterigo_              | entehree'go
  cardinal           | _kardinalo_             | kar-deenah'lo
  cathedral          | _katedralo_             | kateh-drah'lo
  cemetery           | _tombejo_               | tombeh'yo
  chapel             | _kapelo_                | kahpeh'lo
  choir (place)      | _ĥorejo_                | _kh_oreh'yo
  choir (singers)    | _ĥoro_                  | _kh_oh'ro
  Christian          | _kristano_              | kris-tah'no
  Christianity       | _kristanismo_           | kristah-nees'mo
  church             | _preĝejo_               | preh-jeh'yo
  Church (as a body) | _la Eklezio_            | la eklehzee'oh
  clergyman          | _ekleziulo_             | eklehzee-oo'lo
  Communion          | _komunio_               | komoonee'oh
  confession         | _konfeso_               | kon-feh'so
  congregation       | _adorantaro_            | adohrahn-tah'ro
  convent            | _monaĥejo_              | mona_kh_eh'yo
  Creator, the       | _Kreinto_               | kreh-in'toh
  cross              | _kruco_                 | kroot'so
  crucifix           | _krucifikso_            | kroot-sifik'so
  fast-day           | _fastotago_             | fah'sto-tah'go
  festival           | _festo_                 | feh'sto
  font               | _baptujo_               | bahp-too'yo
  funeral            | _funebra ceremonio_     | fooneh'brah
                     |                         |   tsereh-mo-nee'oh
  God                | _Dio_                   | dee'oh
  heaven             | _ĉielo_                 | chee-eh'lo
  hell               | _infero_                | infehr'o
  Holy Ghost         | _la Sankta Spirito_     | la sahnk'ta speeree'toh
    (Spirit)         |                         |
  hymn; -book        | _himno; himnaro_        | him'no; him-nah'ro
  lectern            | _legpupitro_            | lehg-poopee'tro
  litany             | _litanio_               | litahnee'oh
  liturgy            | _liturgio_              | litoorghee'oh
  Lord, the          | _la Sinjoro_            | la sinyoh'ro
  mass, high         | _alta meso_             | ahl'tah meh'so
  --, low            | _malalta meso_          | mal-ahl'tah meh'so
  matins             | _matenpreĝoj_           | mahtehn-preh'joy
  missal             | _meslibro_              | mehss-lee'bro
  nave               | _navo_                  | nah'vo
  offertory (R.C.)   | _ofertorio_             | ohfehr-toree'oh
  -- (collection)    | _monkolekto_            | mohn-kolek'toh
  papal              | _papa_                  | pah'pa
  penance            | _pentofaro_             | pehn'toh-fah'ro
  pew                | _benko_                 | behn'ko
  Pope               | _Papo_                  | pah'po
  prayer             | _preĝo_                 | preh'jo
  prayer-book        | _preĝaro_               | prehjah'ro
  priest, pastor     | _pastro_                | pah'stro
  Protestant         | _Protestanto_           | proteh-stahn'toh
  pulpit             | _katedro_               | kateh'dro
  Roman Catholic     | _Romkatoliko_           | rohm'katohlee'ko
  sacrament          | _sakramento_            | sakrah-mehn'toh
  salvation          | _savo_                  | sah'vo
  Saviour, the       | _la Savinto_            | la sahveen'toh
  sermon             | _prediko_               | prehdee'ko
  service, divine    | _diservo_               | dee-sehr'vo
  service, evening   | _vespera diservo_       | vespeh'ra dee-sehr'vo
  --, morning        | _matena diservo_        | mateh'na dee-sehr'vo
  sitting, seat      | _sidloko_               | seed-lo'ko
  synagogue          | _sinagogo_              | sinahgo'go
  tabernacle         | _tabernaklo_            | tabehr-nah'klo
  transept           | _transepto_             | trahnsehp'toh
  truth              | _vero_                  | vehr'o
  verger             | _pedelo_                | pehdeh'lo
  vespers            | _vesperpreĝoj_          | vespehr-preh'joy
  vestry, sacristy   | _sakristio_             | sakris-tee'oh
  worship            | _adorado_               | adoh-rah'do
  worship, to        | _adori_                 | adoh'ree


27. Professions and Trades. (_Profesioj kaj Metioj_)

(For Shopping, etc., see §§. 53-56.)

NOTE.--The names of workers in the various trades and professions are
formed by adding the suffix *-ist* to the root-word. Thus: _vendi_, to
sell--_vendisto_, a salesman; _lampo_, a lamp--_lampvendisto_, a
lamp-seller, _lampfaristo_, a lamp manufacturer; _maro_, sea--_maristo_,
a sailor; _akrigi_, to sharpen--_akrigisto_, a grinder, etc.

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Architect          | _arĥitekto_             | ar_kh_itek'toh
  artist             | _artisto_               | artist'o
  baker              | _bakisto_               | bah-kist'o
  banker             | _bankiero_              | bahnkee-ehr'o
  barber             | _barbiro_               | barbeer'o
  bookseller         | _librovendisto_         | lee'bro-vendisto
  butcher            | _buĉisto_               | boo-chist'o
  carpenter, joiner  | _ĉarpentisto_           | charr-pehntist'o
  chambermaid        | _ĉambristino_           | chahmbristee'no
  chemist            | _farmaciisto_           | fahrmaht-see-ist'o
  clerk              | _skribisto_             | skreebist'o
  compositor         | _kompostisto_           | kom-postist'o
  confectioner       | _konfitisto_            | konfeetist'o
  consul             | _konsulo_               | kon-soo'lo
  cook               | _kuirist-o, -ino_       | koo-eerist'-o, -ee'no
  editor             | _redaktoro_             | redahk-tohr'o
  engineer           | _inĝeniero_             | injehnee-ehr'o
  fisherman          | _fiŝkaptisto_           | fish'kaptist'o
  fishmonger         | _fiŝvendisto_           | fish'vendist'o
  florist            | _floristo_              | flo-rist'o
  fruiterer          | _fruktovendisto_        | frook'toh-vendist'o
  glazier            | _vitristo_              | veetrist'o
  goldsmith          | _oraĵisto_              | ohrah-zhist'o
  governess          | _guvernistino_          | goovehr-nistee'no
  greengrocer        | _legomvendisto_         | legohm'vendist'o
  grocer             | _spicisto_              | speet-sist'o
  hairdresser        | _frizisto_              | free-zist'o
  hatter             | _ĉapelisto_             | chapeh-list'o
  hosier             | _ŝtrumpaĵisto_          | shtroompah-zhist'o
  ironmonger         | _feraĵvendisto_         | fehrahzh'vendist'o
  jeweller           | _juvelisto_             | yoo-veh-list'o
  journalist         | _ĵurnalisto_            | zhoor-nalist'o
  labourer           | _penlaboristo_          | pehn'labohrist'o
  lawyer             | _advokato_              | ahdvokah'toh
  maid-servant       | _servistino_            | sehr-vistee'no
  man-servant        | _servisto_              | sehr-vist'o
  mason              | _masonisto_             | mahsonist'o
  mechanic           | _maŝinisto_             | mahsheenist'o
  merchant           | _negocisto_             | negoht-sist'o
  miller             | _muelisto_              | moo-ehlist'o
  mother's-help      | _helpistino_            | helpistee'no
  nurse              | _flegistino_            | fleh-ghistee'no
  nursemaid          | _vartistino_            | vahrtistee'no
  optician           | _optikisto_             | opteekist'o
  plumber            | _plumbisto_             | ploombist'o
  policeman          | _policano_[5]           | polit-sah'no
  printer            | _presisto_              | preh-sist'o
  saddler            | _selisto_               | sehlist'o
  shoemaker          | _ŝuisto_                | shoo-ist'o
  shopkeeper         | _butikisto_             | bootikist'o
  smith              | _forĝisto_              | fohrjist'o
  stationer          | _paperaĵisto_           | pa-perah-zhist'o
  student            | _studento_              | stoodehn'toh
  tailor             | _tajloro_               | tahy-loh'ro
  teacher            | _instruisto_            | instroo-ist'o
  tobacconist        | _tabakvendisto_         | tabahk'vendist'o
  tradesman          | _komercisto_            | komehrt-sist'o
  tutor              | _guvernisto_            | goovehrnist'o
  waiter, waitress   | _kelnero, kelnerino_    | kelneh'ro,
                     |                         |   kel-nehr-ee'no
  workman            | _laboristo_             | labohrist'o


28. Legal Terms. (_Leĝaj Terminoj._)

(For Conversations see §. 66.)

  English            | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Accused, the       | _la akuzato_            | la ahkoozah'toh
  acquittal          | _malakuzo_              | mahlahkoo'zo
  to advance (money) | _pruntedoni_            | proon'teh-doh-nee
  agreement, an      | _kontrakto_             | kontrahk'toh
  alibi, an          | _alibio_                | ahleebee'oh
  allege, to         | _alegi_                 | ahleh'ghee
  apology, an        | _pardonpeto_            | pahrdohn-peh'toh
  appeal; to --      | _apelo; apeli_          | ahpeh'lo; ahpeh'lee
  arrangement,       | _interkonsento_         | in'tehr-konsehn'toh
    agreement        |                         |
  arrears            | _restantaj ŝuldoj_      | rehstahn'tahy shool'doy
  arrest, to         | _aresti_                | ahreh'stee
  attest, to         | _atesti_                | ahteh'stee
  attorney           | _prokuratoro_           | prokoorah-toh'ro
  authorise, to      | _rajtigi_               | rahy-tee'ghee
  award, an          | _aljuĝo_                | ahl-yoo'jo
  award, to          | _aljuĝi_                | ahl-yoo'jee
  bail               | _kaŭcio_                | kahwtsee'oh
  bailiff            | _juĝplenumisto_         | yooj'plehnoomist'oh
  bond (for loan)    | _pruntkontrakto_        | proont'kontrahk'toh
  case (suit)        | _proceso_               | prohtseh'so
  charge, to         | _akuzi_                 | ahkoo'zee
  client             | _kliento_               | klee-ehn'toh
  complainant, the   | _la plendanto_          | la plendahn'toh
  contract           | _kontrakto_             | kontrahk'toh
  conviction, a      | _kondamno_              | kondahm'noh
  costs              | _proceskosto_           | prohtsehs-kost'oh
  court of justice   | _tribunalo_             | treeboonah'lo
  criminal, a        | _krimulo_               | krim-oo'lo
  damages            | _monkompenso_           | mohn'kompehn'so
  decision (of case) | _decido_                | dehtsee'doh
  deed               | _akto_                  | ahk'toh
  defend, to         | _defendi_               | dehfehn'dee
  defendant (in a    | _la akuzato_            | la ahkoozah'toh
    suit)            |                         |
  document           | _dokumento_             | dokoomehn'toh
  evidence           | _evidenco_              | ehvidehnt'so
  execution (of      | _subskribigo_           | soobskreebee'go
    deed)            |                         |
  -- (of a judgment) | _plenumo_               | plehnoo'mo
  executor           | _administranto_         | ahdministrahn'to
  fee (of office)    | _honorario_             | honoh-rahree'oh
  fine (penalty)     | _monpuno_               | mohn-poo'no
  information, to    | _denunci_               | dehnoont'see
    give             |                         |
  informer           | _denunc-anto, -into_[6] | dehnoonts-ahn'toh,
                     |                         |   -in'toh
  injunction         | _injunkcio_             | inyoonk-tsee'oh
  inventory          | _inventario_            | invehn-tahree'oh
  jail               | _malliberejo_           | mahllibehr-ehyo
  judge, the         | _juĝisto_               | yoojist'oh
  jurisdiction       | _juĝorajto_             | yoo'jo-rah'y-toh
  jurisprudence      | _juro_                  | yoo'ro
  law-suit           | _proceso_               | proht-seh'so
  non-suit, to       | _malakcepti_            | mahl-ahktsehp'tee
  oath, to take an   | _fari ĵuron_            | fah'ree zhoor'ohn
  parchment          | _pergameno_             | pehrgah-meh'no
  pardon             | _pardono_               | pahrdoh'no
  penal              | _punebla_               | pooneh'blah
  perjury            | _falsa ĵuro_            | fahl'sah zhoor'oh
  petitioner         | _petfarinto_            | peht'fahrin'toh
  police-office      | _policoficejo_          | pohleet'so-feetseh'yo
  -- officer         | _policano_              | pohleet-sah'no
  -- station         | _policejo_              | pohleet-seh'yo
  proof              | _pruvo_                 | proo'voh
  prosecute to       | _persekuti_             | pehrsehkoo'tee
  prosecution (of    | _persekuto_             | pehrsehkoo'toh
    suit)            |                         |
  prosecutor         | _persekut-anto,         | pehrsehkoot-ahn'toh,
                     |   -isto_[7]             |   -ist'oh
  punishment         | _puno_                  | poo'no
  quash              | _kasacii_               | kahsaht-see'ee
  robbery            | _rabo_                  | rah'bo
  seal, a            | _sigelo_                | seegeh'lo
  sentence, a        | _sentenco_              | sehntehnt'so
  sheriff            | _skabeno_               | skahbeh'no
  statement          | _deklaro (skribita)_    | dehklah'ro
    (written)        |                         |   (skreebee'tah)
  sue, to            | _persekuti_             | pehrsehkoo'tee
  suit               | _proceso_               | prohtseh'so
  summons (of court) | _asigno_                | ahseeg'no
  testator           | _testamentinto_         | tehstah-mehntin'toh
  theft              | _ŝtelo_                 | shteh'lo
  thief              | _ŝtel-isto, -into_      | shtehl-ist'oh, -in'toh
  trial              | _proceso_               | prohtseh'so
  verdict            | _verdikto_              | vehrdeek'toh
  witness            | _atestanto_             | ahteh-stahn'toh
  writ               | _asignordono_           | ahseeg'nordoh'no


29. Commercial Terms. (_Komercaj Terminoj._)

(For Conversations see §. 67.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Account            | _konto_                 | kon'toh
  --, current        | _kuranta konto_         | koorahn'ta kon'toh
  --, joint          | _komuna konto_          | komoo'na kon'toh
  --, to close an    | _fermi konton_          | fehr'mee kon'tohn
  --, to settle an   | _pagi konton_           | pah'gee kon'tohn
  acknowledgment     | _ricevavizo_            | ritseh'vahvee'zo
  agency             | _agentejo_              | ahghen-teh'yo
  agent              | _agento_                | ahghehn'toh
  apprentice         | _metilernanto_          | mehtee'lehr-nahn'toh
  arrear, in         | _malfrue_               | mahlfroo'eh
  assets             | _aktivo_                | ahktee'voh
  balance of account | _saldo de konto_        | sahl'doh deh kon'toh
  balance-sheet      | _bilanco_               | bilahnt'so
  bank               | _banko_                 | bahn'ko
  bankrupt; a --     | _bankrotin-ta; -to_     | bahn-krotin'-tah; -toh
  bankruptcy,        | _bankroto_              | bahn-kro'toh
    failure          |                         |
  bearer             | _portanto_              | portahn'toh
  bill (account)     | _kalkulo_               | kahlkoo'lo
  bill (comml.       | _bilo_                  | bee'lo
    document)        |                         |
  -- at sight        | _kambio je vido_        | kahmbee'oh yeh vee'doh
  -- at 3 months'    | _kambio je tri monatoj_ | kahmbee'oh yeh tree
    date             |                         |   monah'toy
  -- of exchange     | _kambio_                | kahm-bee'oh
  -- of lading       | _ŝarĝatesto_            | shahr-jah-teh'stoh
  bond, a            | _obligacio_             | obligaht-see'o
  bond, in           | _kuŝanta en             | kooshahn'ta en
                     |   dogantenejo_          |   dogahn'teneh'yo
  bonded goods       | _komercaĵoj en dogano   | komehrt-sah'zhoy ehn
                     |   deponitaj_            |   dogah'no
                     |                         |   depohnee'tahy
  book-keeper        | _librotenisto_          | lee'bro-tenis'toh
  branch-            | _filio_                 | filee'oh
    establishment    |                         |
  broker             | _makleristo_            | mah-klehrist'o
    brokerage        | _kurtaĝo_               | koortah'jo
  business           | _la aferoj_             | la ahfeh'roy
  buyer              | _aĉetisto_              | ahchehtist'o
  cargo              | _ŝarĝo_                 | shahr'jo
  carriage           | _transportprezo_        | trahnsport-preh'zo
    carriage-paid    | _kun transporto pagita_ | koon trahns-pohr'toh
                     |                         |   pah-ghee'tah
  cashier            | _kasisto_               | kahsist'o
  charter a ship, to | _lui ŝipon_             | loo'ee shee'pohn
  charter-party      | _ĉarto_                 | chahr'toh
  catalogue          | _katalogo_              | kah-tahlo'go
  cheque             | _ĉeko_                  | cheh'ko
  claim              | _pretendo_              | prehtehn'doh
  clerk              | _oficisto_              | ofeet-sist'o
  company            | _kompanio_              | kompah-nee'oh
  --, joint-stock    | _akcia kompanio_        | ahk-tsee'ah
                     |                         |   kompah-nee'oh
  --, limited        | _limigita kompanio_     | limighee'tah "
  compensation       | _kompenso_              | kompehn'so
  complaint          | _plendo_                | plehn'doh
  confiscate, to     | _konfiski_              | konfis'kee
  contract, a        | _kontrakto_             | kontrahk'toh
  cost, insurance    | _kosto, asekuro kaj_    | kost'o, ahseh-koor'o
    and              |                         |
    freight (c.i.f.) | _frajto_                | kahy frah'y-toh
  cost price         | _kostprezo_             | kost-preh'zo
  credit             | _kredito_               | krehdee'toh
    creditor         | _kreditoro_             | kreditohr'o
  custom-house       | _doganejo_              | doganeh'yo
  customs, the       | _la dogano_             | la dogah'no
  -- clearing-house  | _doganesplorejo_        | dogahn'esploreh'yo
  customs duties     | _doganimpostoj_         | dogahn'impos'toy
  damage             | _difekto_               | difekt'o
  damages (law)      | _kompensaĵo_            | kompehn-sah'zho
  debenture shares   | _obligaciaj akcioj_     | obligaht-see'ahy
                     |                         |   ahkt-see'oy
  debit              | _debeto_                | debeh'toh
  debt               | _ŝuldo_                 | shool'doh
    debtor           | _ŝuldanto_              | shool-dahn'toh
  deliver, to        | _liveri_                | liveh'ree
    delivered free   | _liverita afrankite_    | livehree'tah
                     |                         |   afrahnkee'teh
  demurrage          | _pago pro malfruiĝo_    | pah'go pro
                     |                         |   mahlfroo-ee'jo
  department         | _fako_                  | fah'ko
  director, manager  | _direktoro_             | direktohr'o
  discount; to --    | _diskonto; diskonti_    | diskon'toh; diskon'tee
  dividend           | _dividendo_             | dividehn'doh
  dock and harbour   | _dok- kaj               | dohk- kahy
    dues             |   haven-impostoj_       |   havehn'-impos'toy
  double entry, by   | _per duobla enskribo_   | per doo-oh'bla
                     |                         |   enskree'bo
  draft              | _trato_                 | trah'toh
    draw upon, to    | _trati (iun)_           | trah'tee (ee'oon)
    drawee           | _tratato_               | tratah'toh
    drawer           | _tratanto_              | tratahn'toh
  duty, export       | _eksportimposto_        | eksport'impost'oh
    --, import       | _importimposto_         | import'impost'oh
    duty-free        | _senimposte_            | sen-impost'eh
  enclosed           | _entenata_              | entehnah'ta
  enclosure, an      | _enmetaĵo_              | enmeh-tah'zho
  endorse, to        | _ĝiri_                  | jee'ree
    endorsee         | _ĝirato_                | jeerah'toh
    endorsement      | _ĝiro_                  | jeer'o
    endorser         | _ĝiranto_               | jeerahn'toh
  exchange, an       | _interŝanĝo_            | intehr-shahn'jo
  -- (place)         | _borso_                 | bohr'so
  -- (difference)    | _aĝio_                  | ahjee'oh
  excise             | _akcizo_                | ahk-tsee'zo
  exports            | _eksportoj_             | ekspor'toy
  firm, a            | _firmo_                 | feer'mo
  forwarding         | _eksped-o, -ado_[8]     | ekspeh'-doh, -dah'doh
  free on board      | _afranke sur ŝipon_     | afrahn'keh soor
    (f.o.b.)         |                         |   sheep'ohn
  freightage         | _frajta prezo_          | frahy'tah preh'zo
  guarantee, a       | _garantio_              | garahntee'o
  imports            | _importoj_              | impohr'toy
  insolvent          | _nesolventa_            | nehsolvehn'ta
  insurance policy   | _asekura poliso_        | ahsehkoor'ah polee'so
  -- premium         | _asekura premio_        | ahsehkoor'ah prehmee'oh
  insure, to         | _asekuri_               | ahsehkoo'ree
  introduction       | _prezento_              | prehzehn'toh
  --, letter of      | _prezenta letero_       | prehzehn'ta leteh'ro
  invest, to (money) | _plasi_                 | plah'see
  letter of advice   | _avizletero_            | ahveez'leteh'ro
  liabilities        | _pasivo, ŝuldaro_       | pahsee'vo, shool-dah'ro
  liable to duty     | _impostebla_            | imposteh'blah
  load, to           | _ŝarĝi_                 | shahr'jee
  loss               | _malprofito_            | mahl-profee'toh
  manifest, a        | _manifesto_             | mah-nifeh'sto
  marine insurance   | _marasekuro_            | mahr'ahseh-koo'ro
  market             | _komercejo_             | komehrt-seh'yo
    foreign market   | _eksterlanda vendado_   | ekstehrlahn'da
                     |                         |   vendah'doh
    home market      | _enlanda vendado_       | enlahn'da vendah'doh
    London market    | _Londona vendado_       | londoh'na vendah'doh
    market-day       | _vendeja tago_          | vendeh'yah ta'go
    market dues      | _vendejaj impostoj_     | vendeh'yahy impos'toy
  market price       | _vendeja prezo_         | vendeh'yah preh'zo
  not negotiable     | _nenegocebla_           | neh-nehgoht-seh'blah
  offer for sale, to | _elmeti al vendo_       | elmeh'tee al vehn'doh
  office             | _oficejo_               | ofitseh'yo
  order, to (goods)  | _mendi_                 | mehn'dee
  packing            | _pakado_                | pahkah'doh
  partner            | _partisto_              | pahrtist'o
  payable            | _pagebla_               | pa-geh'blah
  port of delivery   | _livera haveno_         | livehr'ah haveh'no
  preference shares  | _preferencaj akcioj_    | prefehrent'sahy
                     |                         |   ahk-tsee'oy
  prepaid            | _afrankita_             | afrahn-kee'ta
  price              | _prezo_                 | preh'zo
    price-list       | _prezaro_               | prehzahr'o
  quarantine         | _kvaranteno_            | kvarahn-teh'no
  quotation (of      | _prezpropono_           | prehz'prohpo'no
    price)           |                         |
  rate of interest   | _procento_              | prohtsehn'toh
  receipt            | _kvitanco_              | kvitahnt'so
  receiver           | _likvidisto_            | likvee-dist'o
  register, to       | _registri_              | reh-ghees'tree
  registered tonnage | _registra tonaĵo_       | reh-ghees'tra tonah'zho
  registration       | _registr-o, -ado_       | reh-ghees'-tro,
                     |                         |   -trah'doh
  representative     | _reprezentanto_         | reprehzen-tahn'toh
  rent               | _luprezo_               | loo-preh'zo
  retail (_adj. &    | _pomalgrand-a, -e_      | po-malgrahn'-da, -deh
    adv._)           |                         |
  salesman, seller   | _vendisto_              | vehndist'o
  selling price      | _vendoprezo_            | vehn'doh-preh'zo
  settling days      | _pagtagoj_              | pahg-tah'goy
  shareholder        | _akciulo_               | ahk-tsee-oo'lo
  shares             | _akcioj_                | ahk-tsee'oy
  ship, to           | _enŝipigi_              | enshipee'ghee
  shippers           | _ekspedistoj_           | ekspeh-dis'toy
  shipping charges   | _ŝarĝadaj elspezoj_     | shahrja'dahy elspeh'zoy
  shop-assistant     | _komizo_                | komee'zo
  solvent            | _solventa_              | solvehn'ta
  stevedore          | _stivisto_              | steevist'o
  stow, to (cargo)   | _stivi_                 | stee'vee
  telegraphic        | _telegrafa adreso_      | telehgrah'fah ahdreh'so
    address          |                         |
  towing charges     | _trenŝipaj pagoj_       | trehn-shee'pahy pahgoy
  trade, commerce    | _komerc-o, -ado_        | komehrt'-so, -sah'doh
  transaction        | _negoco_                | nehgoht'so
  traveller,         | _komerca vojaĝisto_     | komehrt'sah
    commercial       |                         |   vo-yah-jist'o
  underwriter        | _asekurinto_            | ahseh-koorin'toh
  unloading          | _malŝarĝ-o, -ado_       | mahlshahr'-jo, -jah'doh
  visa, to           | _vizi_                  | vee'zee
  warehouse          | _magazeno_              | mah-gazeh'no
  weight, gross      | _kuntara pezo_          | koon-tah'ra peh'zo
  --, net            | _sentara pezo_          | sehn-tah'ra peh'zo
  wharf              | _ŭarfo_                 | wahr'fo
    wharfage         | _ŭarfpago_              | wahrf-pah'go
  wholesale          | _pogrand-a, -e_         | po-grahn'-da, -deh
  winding-up         | _likvido_               | likvee'doh


30. Post, Telegraph and Telephone. (_La Poŝto, la Telegrafo, kaj la
Telefono._)

(For Conversations see §. 64.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Collection         | _kolekto_               | kolek'toh
  contents           | _enhavo_                | ehnhah'vo
  counterfoil        | _kontraŭfolio_          | kon'trahw-folee'oh
  customs            | _dogandeklaro_          | dogahn'dehklar'o
    declaration      |                         |
  delivery           | _livero_                | livehr'o
  description        | _priskribo_             | pree-skree'bo
  despatch note      | _depeŝo_                | dehpeh'sho
  excess postage     | _afrankeksceso_         | afrahnk'eks-tseh'so
  letter post        | _letera poŝto_          | leteh'ra posh'toh
  letter-scales      | _leterpesilo_           | letehr'pehsee'lo
  mail, the          | _la kuriero_            | la kooree-ehr'o
  money order        | _poŝtmandato            | posht-mandah'toh
    (foreign)        |   eksterlanda_          |   eks-terlahn'da
  newspaper wrapper  | _banderolo_             | bahn-dero'lo
  parcel             | _paketo_                | pahkeh'toh
  -- post            | _paketpoŝto_            | pahkeht-posh'toh
  pillar-box         | _leterkesto_            | letehr-kest'o
  post, the          | _la poŝto_              | la pohsh-toh
    postage paid     | _afrankita_             | afrahnkee'tah
    postal order     | _poŝtmandato enlanda_   | posht-mahndah'toh
                     |                         |   en-lahn'da
    post-card        | _poŝtkarto_             | pohsht-kahr'toh
    post-office      | _poŝtoficejo_           | posht-ofeet-seh'yo
    postman          | _leterportisto_         | letehr'pohrtist'o
    postmaster       | _poŝtestro_             | pohsh-tehs'tro
  re-address, to     | _readresi_              | reh-ahdreh'see
  register, to       | _registri_              | reh-ghees'tree
  reply paid         | _respondafrankita_      | respond'afrahn-kee'ta
  stamps             | _poŝtmarkoj_            | posht-mahr'koy
  telegram           | _telegramo_             | teleh-grah'mo
  telegraph, to      | _telegrafi_             | teleh-grah'fee
  -- form            | _telegrama folio_       | teleh-grah'ma folee'oh
  -- messenger       | _telegramportisto_      | telehgrahm'pohrtist'o
  -- office          | _telegrafejo_           | teleh-grafeh'yo
  telephone          | _telefono_              | teleh-fo'no
  -- call office     | _telefonejo_            | teleh-foneh'yo
  -- number          | _telefona numero_       | teleh-fo'na noomehr'o
    ring up, to      | _telefoni_              | teleh-fo'nee
  to be called for   | _poŝtrestante_          | posht-restahn'teh
  value, insured     | _asekurita valoro_      | ahsekooree'ta vahlohr'o
  weigh, to          | _pesi_                  | peh'see
    weight, a        | _pezilo_                | pehzee'lo
    -- (of anything) | _pezo_                  | peh'zo
    --, over         | _tro peza_              | tro peh'zah


31. Correspondence. (_Korespondado._)

(For Conversations see §. 65.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Address            | _adreso_                | ah-dreh'so
  blotting-paper     | _sorba papero_          | sohr'ba pa-pehr'o
  date               | _dato_                  | da'toh
  --, to             | _dat-i, -umi_           | dah'-tee, -too'mee
  envelope           | _koverto_               | ko-vehr'toh
  fasten, close, to  | _fermi_                 | fehr'mee
  immediate          | _tuja_                  | too'yah
  ink                | _inko_                  | een'ko
    inkstand         | _inkujo_                | een-koo'yo
  letter             | _letero_                | letehr'o
    letter-box       | _leterkesto_            | leh-tehr-kest'o
  note               | _noto_                  | no'toh
    note-paper       | _leterpapero_           | letehr'pa-pehr'o
  packet             | _paketo_                | pah-keht'o
  pen                | _plumo_                 | ploo'mo
  --, fountain       | _fontoplumo_            | fon'toh-ploo'mo
    penholder        | _plumingo_              | ploom-een'go
    penknife         | _tranĉileto_            | trahn-chee-leh'toh
  pencil             | _krajono_               | krah-yo'no
  quire              | _kajero_                | kah-yeh'ro
  ream               | _rismo_                 | rees'mo
  seal, a            | _sigelo_                | see-gheh'lo
  seal, to           | _sigeli_                | see-gheh'lee
    sealing-wax      | _sigelvakso_            | see-ghehl-vahk'so
  sheet              | _folio_                 | fo-lee'o
  signature          | _subskribo_             | soob-skree'bo
  urgent             | _urĝa_                  | oorr'jah
  writing            | _la skribo_             | la skree'bo
  -- materials       | _skribilaro_            | skree-bee-lah'ro


32. The Cardinal Numbers. (_La Fundamentaj Numeraloj._)

(For Grammatical Notes see section "Cardinal Numbers".)

   0  _Nulo_ (nool'oh)  17  _dek sep_         79  _sepdek naŭ_
   1  _unu_  (oo'noo)   18  _dek ok_          80  _okdek_
   2  _du_   (doo)      19  _dek naŭ_         90  _naŭdek_
   3  _tri_  (tree)     20  _dudek_          100  _cent_    (tsehnt)
   4  _kvar_ (kvahr)    21  _dudek unu_      101  _cent unu_
   5  _kvin_ (kvin)     22  _dudek du_       102  _cent du_
   6  _ses_  (sehss)    23  _dudek tri_      200  _du cent_ (doot'sehnt)
   7  _sep_  (sehp)     24  _dudek kvar_     300  _tricent_
   8  _ok_   (ohk)      30  _tridek_         400  _kvarcent_
   9  _naŭ_ (nahw)      35  _tridek kvin_    500  _kvincent_
  10  _dek_  (dehk)     40  _kvardek_        600  _sescent_
  11  _dek unu_         46  _kvardek ses_    700  _sepcent_
  12  _dek du_          50  _kvindek_        800  _okcent_
  13  _dek tri_         57  _kvindek sep_    900  _naŭcent_
  14  _dek kvar_        60  _sesdek_       1,000  _mil_     (meel)
  15  _dek kvin_        68  _sesdek ok_
  16  _dek ses_         70  _sepdek_

      2,679  _dumil sescent sepdek naŭ._
      3,000  _trimil._
     10,000  _dek mil._
     20,000  _dudek mil._
    389,345  _tricent okdek naŭmil tricent kvardek kvin._
  1,000,000  _(unu) miliono_ [(oo'noo) meeleeoh'no].
  4,000,000  _kvar milionoj._

  1908  ...  _Mil naŭcent ok._

NOTE.--Observe that the cardinal numbers are grouped together (without
hyphens) in thousands, hundreds, tens and units. Thus, 548 is _kvincent
kvardek ok_, not _kvincent-kvardek-ok_, and 17 _dek sep_, not _dek-sep_.


33. Ordinal Numerals. (_La Ordaj Numeraloj._)

(For Grammatical Notes see section "Ordinal Numbers".)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  First              | _unua_                  | oonoo'ah
  second             | _dua_                   | doo'ah
  third              | _tria_                  | tree'ah
  fourth             | _kvara_                 | kvah'rah
  fifth              | _kvina_                 | kvee'nah
  sixth              | _sesa_                  | seh'sah
  seventh            | _sepa_                  | seh'pah
  eighth             | _oka_                   | oh'kah
  ninth              | _naŭa_                  | nah'wah
  tenth              | _deka_                  | deh'kah
  eleventh           | _dek-unua_              | dehk-oonoo'ah
  twelfth            | _dek-dua_               | dehkdoo'ah
  thirteenth         | _dek-tria_              | dehktree'ah
  fourteenth         | _dek-kvara_             | dehk-kvah'rah
  fifteenth          | _dek-kvina_             | dehk-kvee'nah
  sixteenth          | _dek-sesa_              | dehkseh'sah
  seventeenth        | _dek-sepa_              | dehkseh'pah
  eighteenth         | _dek-oka_               | dehk-oh'kah
  nineteenth         | _dek-naŭa_              | dehknah'wah
  twentieth          | _dudeka_                | doodeh'kah
  twenty-first       | _dudek-unua_            | doo'dehk-oonoo'ah
  twenty-second      | _dudek-dua_             | doo'dehk-doo'ah
  twenty-third       | _dudek-tria_            | doo'dehk-tree'ah
  twenty-fourth      | _dudek-kvara_           | doo'dehk-kvah'rah
  twenty-fifth       | _dudek-kvina_           | doo'dehk-kvee'nah
  thirtieth          | _trideka_               | treedeh'kah
  thirty-second      | _tridek-dua_            | treedehk-doo'ah
  fortieth           | _kvardeka_              | kvahrdeh'kah
  fiftieth           | _kvindeka_              | kvindeh'kah
  sixtieth           | _sesdeka_               | sehsdeh'kah
  seventieth         | _sepdeka_               | sehpdeh'kah
  eightieth          | _okdeka_                | ohkdeh'kah
  ninetieth          | _naŭdeka_               | nahw-deh'kah
  hundredth          | _centa_                 | tsehn'tah
  hundred and first  | _cent-unua_             | tsehnt-oonoo'ah
  two hundred and    | _ducent-kvindek-dua_    | doot'sehnt-kvin'dehk-
    fifty-second     |                         |   doo'ah
  thousandth         | _mila_                  | mee'lah


34. Collective and Fractional Numbers. (_Kolektivaj kaj Nombronaj
Numeraloj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  All                | _ĉiom (da)_             | chee'ohm (dah)
  couple, a          | _paro_                  | pah'ro
  double             | _duobla_                | doo-oh'blah
  doubly             | _duoble_                | doo-oh'bleh
  dozen, a           | _dekduo_                | dehk-doo'oh
  fifth, a           | _kvinono_               | kvee-no'no
  firstly            | _unue_                  | oonoo'eh
  gross, a           | _cent kvardek kvar_     | tsehnt kvahr'dehk kvahr
  half-a-dozen       | _duondekduo_            | doo-ohn'dehkdoo'oh
  once               | _unufoje_               | oo'noo-fo'yeh
  one by one         | _unuope_                | oonoo-oh'peh
  one-half           | _unu duono_             | oo'noo doo-oh'no
  pair, a            | _paro_                  | pah'ro
  part, portion      | _parto_                 | pahr'to
  quarter, fourth    | _kvarono_               | kvahro'no
    part             |                         |
  score, a           | _dudeko_                | doodeh'ko
  secondly           | _due_                   | doo'eh
  single             | _unuopa_                | oonoo-oh'pah
  singly             | _unuope_                | oonoo-oh'peh
  third, a           | _triono_                | tree-oh'no
  thirdly            | _trie_                  | tree'eh
  threefold          | _trioble_               | tree-oh'bleh
  three-quarters     | _tri kvaronoj_          | tree kvahro'noy
  three-sevenths     | _tri seponoj_           | tree sehpoh'noy
  twice              | _dufoje, dufojojn_      | doo-fo'yeh, doo fo'yoyn
  two by two         | _duope_                 | doo-oh'peh
  two-sixths         | _du sesonoj_            | doo seh-so'noy
  whole, the         | _la tuto_               | la too'toh


35. Adjectives. (_Adjektivoj._)

(For Grammatical Notes see section "The Adjective".)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Able (capable)     | _kapabla_               | kah-pah'blah
  bad, wicked        | _malbona_               | mahl-bo'nah
  beautiful,         | _bela_                  | beh'la
    handsome         |                         |
  beloved            | _amata_                 | ahmah'tah
  bitter             | _maldolĉa_              | mahl-dohl'chah
  blind              | _blinda_                | bleen'dah
  blunt              | _malakra_               | mahl-ah'krah
  bold               | _kuraĝema_              | koorah-jeh'ma
  brave              | _brava_                 | brah'vah
  bright             | _hela_                  | heh'la
  broad, wide        | _larĝa_                 | lar'jah
  careful            | _zorgema_               | zorgeh'ma
  careless           | _senzorga_              | sen-zor'ga
  certain            | _certa_                 | tsehr'tah
  cheap              | _malkara_               | mahl-kah'ra
  clean              | _pura_                  | poo'rah
  clear              | _klara_                 | klah'ra
  clever             | _lerta_                 | lehr'tah
  cold               | _malvarma_              | mahl-vahr'ma
  comfortable        | _komforta_              | kohm-fohr'tah
  corpulent          | _korpulenta_            | korpoolehn'tah
  costly             | _multekosta_            | mool'teh-kohs'tah
  damp               | _malseka_               | mahl-seh'ka
  dangerous          | _danĝera_               | dahn-jeh'rah
  dark               | _malluma_               | mahl-loo'ma
  deaf               | _surda_                 | soor'dah
  dear               | _kara_                  | kah'ra
  deep               | _profunda_              | pro-foon'dah
  different          | _malsama_               | mahl-sah'ma
  dirty              | _malpura_               | mahl-poo'rah
  disagreeable       | _malagrabla_            | mahl-ahgrah'blah
  dry                | _seka_                  | seh'ka
  dull (of weather)  | _malklara_              | mahl-klah'rah
  dusty              | _polva_                 | pohl'vah
  early              | _frua_                  | froo'ah
  easy               | _facila_                | faht-see'lah
  empty              | _malplena_              | mahl-pleh'na
  every              | _ĉiu_                   | chee'oo
  false              | _malvera_               | mahl-vehr'ah
  fashionable        | _laŭmoda_               | lahw-mo'dah
  fat (stout)        | _dikkorpa_              | deek-kor'pa
  few                | _malmultaj_             | mahl-mool'tahy
  fine (excellent)   | _bonega_                | boneh'gah
  -- (in quality)    | _delikata_              | dehlee-kah'tah
  fit (for)          | _taŭga_                 | tahw'gah
  flat               | _plata_                 | plah'tah
  foolish            | _malsaĝa_               | mahl-sah'jah
  fortunate          | _bonŝanca_              | bohn-shahnt'sah
  free               | _libera_                | libeh'ra
  frequent           | _ofta_                  | off'tah
  fresh              | _freŝa_                 | freh'shah
  front              | _antaŭa_                | ahntah'wah
  full               | _plena_                 | pleh'nah
  gay                | _gaja_                  | gah'yah
  general, usual     | _kutima_                | kootee'ma
  gentle, polite     | _ĝentila_               | jentee'la
  good               | _bona_                  | boh'nah
  grand              | _grandioza_             | grahndee-oh'zah
  great              | _granda_                | grahn'dah
  happy              | _feliĉa_                | fehlee'chah
  hard               | _malmola_               | mahl-mo'la
  heavy              | _peza_                  | peh'zah
  high               | _alta_                  | ahl'tah
  honest             | _honesta_               | honeh'stah
  hot                | _varmega_               | vahrmeh'ga
  hungry             | _malsata_               | mahl-sah'tah
  ill (unwell)       | _malsana_               | mahl-sah'nah
  important          | _grava_                 | grah'va
  interesting        | _interesa_              | inteh-reh'sah
  just               | _justa_                 | yoos'tah
  kind               | _bonkora_               | bohn-ko'ra
  lame               | _lama_                  | lah'ma
  large, vast        | _larĝa_                 | lahr'jah
  last               | _lasta_                 | lah'stah
  late               | _malfrua_               | mahl-froo'ah
  light              | _luma_                  | loo'ma
  little, small      | _malgranda_             | mahl-grahn'dah
  long               | _longa_                 | lohn'gah
  loose              | _ne fiksita_            | neh fiksee'tah
  low (in place)     | _malalta_               | mahl-ahl'tah
  many               | _multaj_                | mool'tahy
  mild               | _milda_                 | meel'dah
  muddy              | _kota_                  | ko'tah
  narrow             | _mallarĝa_              | mahl-lahr'jah
  natural            | _natura_                | nahtoor'ah
  new                | _nova_                  | no'vah
  nice, tasty        | _bongusta_              | bohn-goo'stah
  old (not new)      | _malnova_               | mahl-no'vah
  open               | _malfermita_            | mahl-fehrmee'tah
  patient            | _pacienca_              | paht-see-ent'sah
  pleasant           | _agrabla_               | ahgrah'blah
  poor (not rich)    | _malriĉa_               | mahl-ree'chah
  poor (to be        | _kompatinda_            | kompah-teen'dah
    pitied)          |                         |
  possible           | _ebla_                  | eh'blah
  pretty             | _beleta_                | beh-leh'tah
  private            | _privata_               | pree-vah'tah
  probable           | _probabla_              | probah'blah
  proud              | _fiera_                 | fee-eh'rah
  public             | _publika_               | pooblee'ka
  pure, clean        | _pura_                  | poo'rah
  quick, swift       | _rapida_                | rahpee'dah
  quiet              | _kvieta_                | kvee-eh'tah
  rich               | _riĉa_                  | ree'chah
  right              | _prava_                 | prah-vah
  -- (correct)       | _ĝusta_                 | joo'stah
  ripe               | _matura_                | mahtoo'rah
  rough (not smooth) | _malglata_              | mahl-glah'tah
  round              | _ronda_                 | rohn'dah
  rude               | _malĝentila_            | mahl-jenteela
  sacred, holy       | _sankta_                | sahnk'tah
  sad                | _malĝoja_               | mahl-joya
  safe, secure       | _sekura_                | seh-koo'rah
  sharp              | _akra_                  | ah'krah
  short              | _mallonga_              | mahl-lohn'ga
  silent             | _silenta_               | seelehn'tah
  simple             | _simpla_                | seem'plah
  slow               | _malrapida_             | mahl-rahpee'dah
  smooth             | _glata_                 | glah'tah
  soft               | _mola_                  | mo'lah
  sound, reliable    | _fidinda_               | feedeen'dah
  sour               | _acideca_               | ahtsee-deht'sah
  square             | _kvadrata_              | kvah-drah'tah
  straight           | _rekta_                 | rehk'tah
  strange (curious)  | _stranga_               | strahn'gah
  strong             | _forta_                 | fohr'tah
  stupid, dull       | _stulta_                | stool'tah
  sufficient         | _sufiĉa_                | soofee'chah
  sweet              | _dolĉa_                 | dohl'chah
  tall               | _altkreska_             | ahlt-krehs'kah
  tender (loving)    | _amplena_               | ahm-pleh'nah
  thick              | _dika_                  | dee'kah
  thin               | _maldika_               | mahl-dee'ka
  thirsty            | _soifanta_              | so-eefahn'tah
  tough              | _koherema_              | ko-hehreh'mah
  true               | _vera_                  | veh'rah
  ugly               | _malbela_               | mahl-beh'la
  unsettled          | _necerta_               | neht-sehr'tah
    (weather)        |                         |
  useful             | _utila_                 | ootee'la
  usual              | _kutima_                | kootee'ma
  valuable           | _multvalora_            | mooltvahlo'ra
  various            | _diversa_               | deevehr'sah
  warm               | _varma_                 | vahr'ma
  weak               | _malforta_              | mahl-fohr'ta
  wet                | _malseka_               | mahl-seh'kah
  whole              | _tuta_                  | too'tah
  willing            | _volonta_               | volohn'tah
  wise               | _saĝa_                  | sah'jah
  wrong              | _malprava_              | mahl-prah'vah
  young              | _juna_                  | yoo'nah


36. Verbs.

(For Grammatical Notes see section "The Verb".)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  To accept          | _akcepti_               | ahk-tsehp'tee
  " admire           | _admiri_                | ahdmeer'ee
  " answer, reply    | _respondi_              | rehspohn'dee
  " approve          | _aprobi_                | ahpro'bee
  " arrive           | _alveni_                | ahl-veh'nee
  " ascend           | _supreniri_             | soo'preh-neer'ee
  " ask              | _demandi_               | dehman'dee
  " attract, draw    | _altiri_                | ahl-teer'ee
  " awake, _intr._   | _vekiĝi_                | vehkee'jee
  " be               | _esti_                  | eh'stee
  " be hungry        | _malsati_               | mahl-sah'tee
  " be ignorant of   | _nescii_                | nehst-see'ee
  " be mistaken      | _trompiĝi_              | trohmpee'jee
  " be quiet, silent | _silenti_               | seelehn'tee
  " be thirsty       | _soifi_                 | so-ee'fee
  " beat             | _bati_                  | bah'tee
  " begin, _tr._     | _komenci_               | kohment'see
  " believe          | _kredi_                 | kreh'dee
  " blame            | _mallaŭdi_              | mahl-lahw'dee
  " boil, _intr._;   | _boli; boligi_          | bo'lee; bo-lee'ghee
    --, _tr._        |                         |
  " borrow           | _pruntepreni_           | proon'teh-preh'nee
  " bring            | _alporti_               | ahl-por'tee
  " build            | _konstrui_              | konstroo'ee
  " button           | _butonumi_              | bootonoo'mee
  " buy              | _aĉeti_                 | ahcheh'tee
  " carry            | _porti_                 | pohr'tee
  " catch cold       | _malvarmumi_            | mahl-vahrmoo'mee
  " chat             | _babili_                | bahbee'lee
  " climb            | _grimpi_                | grim'pee
  " compare          | _kompari_               | kohmpah'ree
  " consent          | _konsenti_              | konsehn'tee
  " continue,        | _daŭri_                 | dahw'ree
    _intr._          |                         |
  " cook             | _kuiri_                 | koo-ee'ree
  " cough            | _tusi_                  | too'see
  " cover            | _kovri_                 | ko'vree
  " dance            | _danci_                 | dahnt'see
  " decide           | _decidi_                | deht-see'dee
  " deny             | _nei_                   | neh'ee
  " depart, go away  | _foriri_                | for-eer'ee
  " descend          | _malsupreniri_          | mahl-sooprehn-eer'ee
  " desire, wish     | _deziri_                | deh-zeer'ee
    (for)            |                         |
  " dine             | _ĉefmanĝi_              | chehf-mahn'jee
  " do, make         | _fari_                  | fah'ree
  " doubt            | _dubi_                  | doo'bee
  " draw, pull       | _tiri_                  | teer'ee
  " dream            | _sonĝi_                 | sohn'jee
  " drink            | _trinki_                | trin'kee
  " dress            | _vesti_                 | veh'stee
  " dwell, live      | _loĝi_                  | lo'jee
  " eat              | _manĝi_                 | mahn'jee
  " exchange         | _interŝanĝi_            | intehr-shahn'jee
  " excuse           | _ekskuzi_               | ekskoo'zee
  " explain          | _komprenigi_            | kompreh-nee'ghee
  " fall             | _fali_                  | fah'lee
  " feel (by touch)  | _palpi_                 | pahl'pee
  " feel (in mind)   | _senti_                 | sehn'tee
  " find             | _trovi_                 | tro'vee
  " finish, _tr._    | _fini_                  | fee'nee
  " follow           | _sekvi_                 | sehk'vee
  " forget           | _forgesi_               | fohr-gheh'see
  " gather           | _kolekti_               | ko-lehk'tee
  " get              | _akiri_                 | ahkee'ree
  " get up           | _leviĝi_                | lehvee'jee
  " give             | _doni_                  | doh'nee
  " go               | _iri_                   | eer'ee
  " go in            | _eniri_                 | ehneer'ee
  " go out           | _eliri_                 | ehleer'ee
  " grow             | _kreski_                | kreh'skee
  " guide            | _gvidi_                 | gvee'dee
  " hate             | _malami_                | mahlah'mee
  " have             | _havi_                  | hah'vee
  " hear             | _aŭdi_                  | ahw'dee
  " hesitate         | _heziti_                | heh-zee'tee
  " hide             | _kaŝi_                  | kah'shee
  " hope             | _esperi_                | espehr'ee
  " imagine          | _imagi_                 | imah'ghee
  " ignore           | _ignori_                | ignoh'ree
  " intend           | _intenci_               | intehnt'see
  " introduce (one)  | _prezenti_              | prehzehn'tee
  -- (a thing)       | _enkonduki_             | ehnkon-doo'kee
  " joke             | _ŝerci_                 | shehrt'see
  " jump             | _salti_                 | sahl'tee
  " know             | _scii_                  | stsee'ee
  " laugh            | _ridi_                  | ree'dee
  " learn            | _lerni_                 | lehr'nee
  " lend             | _pruntedoni_            | proon'teh-doh'nee
  " lie down         | _kuŝiĝi_                | koo-shee'jee
  " live (be alive)  | _vivi_                  | vee'vee
  " look for         | _serĉi_                 | sehr'chee
  " lose             | _perdi_                 | pehr'dee
  " love             | _ami_                   | ah'mee
  " marry, _intr._   | _edziĝi_                | ehdzee'-jee
    (of a man)       |                         |
  -- (of a woman)    | _edziniĝi_              | ehdzee-nee'jee
  " meet             | _renkonti_              | rehn-kon'tee
  " mention          | _aludi_                 | ahloo'dee
  " need, want       | _bezoni_                | behzoh'nee
  " object           | _oponi_                 | opoh'nee
  " obtain           | _obteni_                | obteh'nee
  " offend           | _ofendi_                | ofehn'dee
  " offer            | _proponi_               | pro-po'nee
  " open             | _malfermi_              | mahl-fehr'mee
  " order (goods)    | _mendi_                 | mehn'dee
  " order, command   | _ordoni_                | ohrdoh'nee
  " pack up          | _paki_                  | pah'kee
  " paint            | _pentri_                | pehn'tree
  " pay; repay       | _pagi; repagi_          | pah'ghee; reh-pah'ghee
  " plant            | _planti_                | plahn'tee
  " play             | _ludi_                  | loo'dee
  " plough           | _plugi_                 | ploo'ghee
  " pluck, pick      | _deŝiri_                | deh-sheer'ee
  " praise           | _laŭdi_                 | lahw'dee
  " prove            | _pruvi_                 | proo'vee
  " read             | _legi_                  | leh'ghee
  " reap             | _rikolti_               | reekohl'tee
  " reckon, count    | _kalkuli_               | kahl-koo'lee
  " receive          | _ricevi_                | reetseh'vee
  " refuse           | _rifuzi_                | ree-foo'zee
  " regret           | _bedaŭri_               | behdahw'ree
  " remember         | _memori_                | meh-mohr'ee
  " repeat           | _ripeti_                | reepeh'tee
  " rest             | _ripozi_                | reepo'zee
  " return, come     | _reveni_                | rehveh'nee
    back             |                         |
  -- (go back)       | _reiri_                 | reh-eer'ee
  -- (give back)     | _redoni_                | reh-doh'nee
  " ring, _tr._      | _sonorigi_              | so-no-ree'ghee
  " roast            | _rosti_                 | roh'stee
  " run              | _kuri_                  | koor'ee
  " say, tell        | _diri_                  | dee'ree
  " search for       | _serĉi_                 | sehr'chee
  " see              | _vidi_                  | vee'dee
  " sell             | _vendi_                 | vehn'dee
  " serve            | _servi_                 | sehr'vee
  " sew, stitch      | _kudri_                 | koo'dree
  " shave            | _razi_                  | rah'zee
  " shine            | _brili_                 | bree'lee
  " show             | _montri_                | mohn'tree
  " sign (letter,    | _subskribi_             | soob-skree'bee
    etc.)            |                         |
  " sit down         | _sidiĝi_                | seedee'jee
  " sleep            | _dormi_                 | dohr'mee
  " sneeze           | _terni_                 | tehr'nee
  " sow (seed)       | _semi_                  | seh'mee
  " speak            | _paroli_                | pahro'lee
  " spoil, _tr._     | _difekti_               | deefehk'tee
  " steal            | _ŝteli_                 | shteh'lee
  " study            | _studi_                 | stoo'dee
  " swear            | _ĵuri_                  | zhoor'ee
  " take             | _preni_                 | preh'nee
  " take off         | _depreni_               | deh-preh'nee
  " take a walk      | _promeni_               | pro-meh'nee
  " taste, _tr._     | _gustumi_               | goostoo'mee
  " tell (a tale)    | _rakonti_               | rahkon'tee
  " thank            | _danki_                 | dahn'kee
  " think            | _pensi_                 | pehn'see
  " throw            | _ĵeti_                  | zheh'tee
  " touch            | _tuŝi_                  | too'shee
  " translate        | _traduki_               | trahdoo'kee
  " travel           | _vojaĝi_                | vo-yah'jee
  " unbutton         | _malbutonumi_           | mahl-bootohnoo'mee
  " unpack           | _malpaki_               | mahl-pah'kee
  " wash             | _lavi_                  | lah'vee
  " weep             | _plori_                 | plo'ree
  " weigh, _tr._;    | _pesi; pezi_            | peh'see; peh'zee
    --, _int._       |                         |
  " will, be willing | _voli_                  | vo'lee
  " work             | _labori_                | lah-boh'ree
  " wrap up          | _envolvi_               | ehn-vol'vee
  " write            | _skribi_                | skree'bee
  " yield, give way  | _cedi_                  | tseh'dee


37. Adverbs, Conjunctions & Prepositions. (_Adverboj, Konjunkcioj kaj
Prepozicioj._)

(For Grammatical Notes see the elementary grammar.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  About (nearly)     | _proksimume_            | prokseemoo'meh
  about (concerning) | _pri_                   | pree
  above              | _super_                 | soo'pehr
  above all          | _antaŭ ĉio_             | ahn'tahw chee'oh
  absolutely         | _absolute_              | ahbsoloo'teh
  according to       | _laŭ_                   | lah'w
  across             | _trans_                 | trahnss
  afresh             | _denove_                | dehno'veh
  after, next to     | _post_                  | pohst
  afterwards         | _poste_                 | pohss'teh
  again              | _ree_                   | reh'eh
  against            | _kontraŭ_               | kohn'trahw
  all (of)           | _ĉiom (da)_             | chee'ohm (dah)
  all at once,       | _subite_                | soobee'teh
    suddenly         |                         |
  almost             | _preskaŭ_               | preh'skahw
  alone, solely      | _sole_                  | so'leh
  aloud              | _laŭte_                 | lahw'teh
  already            | _jam_                   | yahm
  also, too, besides | _ankaŭ_                 | ahn'kahw
  although           | _kvankam_               | kvahn'kahm
  altogether, quite  | _tute_                  | too'teh
  always             | _ĉiam_                  | chee'ahm
  and                | _kaj_                   | kah'y
  anywhere           | _kie ajn_               | kee'eh ah'yn
  around, round      | _ĉirkaŭ_                | cheer'kahw
    about            |                         |
  as...as            | _tiel...kiel..._        | tee'ehl...kee'ehl...
  as much, as many   | _tiom_                  | tee'ohm
  as much as         | _tiom kiom_             | tee'ohm kee'ohm
  as soon as,        | _tuj kiam_              | too'y kee'ahm
    immediately      |                         |
  at                 | _ĉe_                    | cheh
  at first           | _unue_                  | oonoo'eh
  at last            | _fine_                  | fee'neh
  at least           | _almenaŭ_               | ahl-meh'nahw
  at [the] most      | _pleje_                 | pleh'yeh
  at once            | _tuj_                   | tooy'
  at present         | _nune_                  | noo'neh
  badly              | _malbone_               | mahlbo'neh
  because            | _ĉar_                   | chahr
  before             | _antaŭ_                 | ahn'tahw
  behind             | _post_                  | pohst
  below, under,      | _sub_                   | soob
    beneath          |                         |
  besides, beyond    | _krom_                  | krohm
  better             | _pli bone_              | plee bo'neh
  between, among(st) | _inter_                 | een'tehr
  beyond             | _preter_                | preh'tehr
  briefly, shortly   | _mallonge_              | mahl-lohn'geh
  but                | _sed_                   | sehd
  by the side of     | _apud, flanke de_       | ah'pood, flahn'keh deh
  by turns           | _laŭvice_               | lahw-veet'seh
  close to           | _apud_                  | ah'pood
  consequently       | _sekve_                 | sehk'veh
  daily              | _ĉiutage_               | chee-ootah'gheh
  doubtless          | _sendube_               | sehndoo'beh
  down (direction)   | _malsupren_             | mahlsoo'prehn
  down (position)    | _malsupre_              | mahlsoo'preh
  during             | _dum_                   | doom
  early, betimes     | _frue_                  | froo'eh
  either...or        | _aŭ...aŭ_               | ahw...ahw
  elsewhere          | _aliloke_               | ahleelo'keh
  enough (of)        | _sufiĉe (da)_           | soofee'cheh (dah)
  even if            | _eĉ se_                 | ehch seh
  everywhere         | _ĉie_                   | chee'eh
  exactly            | _precize_               | preht-see'zeh
  exceedingly        | _treege_                | treh-eh'geh
  except, _prep._    | _escepte_               | est-sehp'teh
  far, distant       | _malproksime_           | mahl-proksee'meh
  for, _conj._       | _ĉar_                   | chahr
  for, _prep._       | _por_                   | pohr
  formerly           | _antaŭe_                | ahntah'weh
  from               | _de_                    | deh
  full of            | _plena de_              | pleh'nah deh
  fully              | _plene_                 | pleh'neh
  hardly             | _apenaŭ_                | ahpeh'nahw
  here               | _ĉi tie, tie ĉi_        | chee tee'eh, tee'eh
                     |                         |   chee
  herewith           | _ĉi-kune_               | chee-koo'neh
  how, like          | _kiel_                  | kee'ehl
  how much?          | _kiom?_                 | kee'ohm?
  however            | _tamen_                 | tah'mehn
  immediately        | _tuj_                   | too'y
  in                 | _en_                    | ehn
  in every way       | _ĉiel_                  | chee'ehl
  in front, before   | _antaŭe_                | ahntah'weh
  in future          | _en la estonteco_       | ehn lah estohn-teht'so
  in spite of        | _malgraŭ_               | mahl'grahw
  in the midst of    | _meze de_               | meh'zeh deh
  indeed             | _vere_                  | veh'reh
  inside             | _interne de, en_        | intehr'neh deh, ehn
  instead of         | _anstataŭ_              | ahnstaht'ahw
  late               | _malfrue_               | mahl-froo'eh
  less               | _malpli_                | mahl'plee
  little (of)        | _malmulte (da)_         | mahl-mool'teh (dah)
  little by little   | _iom post iom_          | ee'ohm pohst ee'ohm
  more               | _pli_                   | plee
  more or less       | _pli malpli_            | plee mahl'plee
  the more...the     | _ju pli...des pli_      | yoo plee...dehs plee
    more             |                         |
  much, very         | _tre_                   | treh
  mutually           | _reciproke_             | reht'see-pro'keh
  near; -- to        | _proksime; -- de_       | prohksee'meh; -- deh
  neither...nor      | _nek...nek_             | nehk...nehk
  never              | _neniam_                | neh-nee'ahm
  nevertheless       | _tamen_                 | tah'mehn
  not                | _ne_                    | neh
  not at all         | _tute ne_               | too'teh neh
  notwithstanding    | _malgraŭ (tio)_         | mahl'grahw (tee'oh)
  not yet            | _ankoraŭ ne_            | ahnkoh'rahw neh
  now                | _nun_                   | noon
  nowadays           | _nuntempe, hodiaŭ_      | noon-tehm'peh,
                     |                         |   hoh-dee'ahw
  nowhere            | _nenie_                 | neh-nee'eh
  of                 | _de; da_ (after         | deh; dah
                     |   numerals)             |
  of course          | _kompreneble_           | kompreh-neh'bleh
  often              | _ofte_                  | off'teh
  on, upon           | _sur_                   | soor
  on account of      | _pro_                   | pro
  on no account      | _nenial_                | neh-nee'ahl
  on the contrary    | _kontraŭe_              | kontrah'weh
  on the left        | _maldekstre_            | mahl-dek'streh
  on the right       | _dekstre_               | dehk'streh
  only               | _nur_                   | noor
  opposite           | _kontraŭe_              | kontrah'weh
  or                 | _aŭ_                    | ahw
  otherwise          | _alie_                  | ahlee'eh
  outside, out of    | _ekster_                | eks'tehr
  over               | _super_                 | soo'pehr
  perhaps            | _eble_                  | eh'bleh
  presently, soon    | _baldaŭ_                | bahl'dahw
  previously         | _antaŭe_                | ahntah'weh
  purposely          | _intence_               | intehnt'seh
  quickly            | _rapide_                | rahpee'deh
  rather, preferably | _prefere_               | prehfeh'reh
  rather, somewhat   | _iom_                   | ee'ohm
  save, excepting    | _escepte_               | ehst-sehp'teh
  scarcely           | _apenaŭ_                | ahpeh'nahw
  seldom, rarely     | _malofte_               | mahl-off'teh
  since, _prep._     | _de_                    | deh
  --, _conj._        | _ĉar_                   | chahr
  -- (the time when) | _de l' tempo kiam_      | dehl tehm'po kee'ahm
  so, thus           | _tiel_                  | tee'ehl
  so much            | _tiom_                  | tee'ohm
  somehow            | _iel_                   | ee'ehl
  something          | _io_                    | ee'oh
  sometimes          | _kelkafoje_             | kehl'kah-fo'yeh
  soon               | _baldaŭ_                | bahl'dahw
  suddenly           | _subite_                | soo-bee'teh
  that, _conj._      | _ke_                    | keh
  that is            | _tio estas_ (abbr.,     | tee'oh es'tahss
                     |   _t.e._)               |
  then               | _tiam_                  | tee'ahm
  then, _conj._      | _do_                    | doh
  thence             | _de tie_                | deh tee'eh
  there              | _tie_                   | tee'eh
  through            | _tra_                   | trah
  through (by means  | _per_                   | pehr
    of)              |                         |
  till, until        | _ĝis_                   | jeess
  to                 | _al_                    | ahl
  together           | _kune_                  | koo'neh
  too much, too      | _tro_                   | tro
  towards            | _al, en la direkto de_  | ahl, ehn lah
                     |                         |   deerehk'toh deh
  unexpectedly       | _neatendite_            | neh-ahtehndee'teh
  unless             | _se...ne_               | seh...neh
  until              | _ĝis_                   | jeess
  up, upwards        | _supren_                | soo'prehn
  up above           | _supre_                 | soo'preh
  weekly             | _ĉiusemajne_            | chee'oo-sehmah'y-neh
  well               | _bone_                  | bo'neh
  when               | _kiam_                  | kee'ahm
  whence?            | _de kie?_               | deh kee'eh?
  where?             | _kie?_                  | kee'eh?
  wherever           | _kie ajn_               | kee'eh ahyn'
  whether, if        | _ĉu_                    | choo
  while, whilst      | _dum_                   | doom
  why?               | _kial?_                 | kee'ehl?
  willingly          | _volonte_               | volohn'teh
  wisely             | _saĝe_                  | sah'jeh
  with               | _kun_                   | koon
  within             | _interne_               | intehr'neh
  without            | _sen_                   | sehn
  yearly             | _ĉiujare_               | chee'oo-yah'reh
  yet, as yet        | _ankoraŭ_               | ahnkoh'rahw




ELEMENTARY GRAMMAR.


The Article.

The DEFINITE ARTICLE _the_ is in Esperanto represented by _la_. Like the
article in English, _la_ does not vary with the number or gender of the
noun before which it is placed; e.g., _la briko_, the brick; _la
brikoj_, the bricks; _la patro_, the father; _la patrinoj_, the mothers.

The INDEFINITE ARTICLE _a_ is not expressed in Esperanto. Thus, "_filo_"
is _son_ or _a son_.


The Noun.

In Esperanto every noun in the singular ends in *o*. Thus: viro, _a
man_; la libro, _the book_. The plural is formed from the singular by
adding the termination *-j*. Thus: viroj, _men_; la libroj, _the books_.

In order to allow each nation to construct its sentences in the order to
which it is accustomed, every noun in Esperanto has two forms or
"cases," (1) the NOMINATIVE, or unchanged form, and (2) the ACCUSATIVE,
which is formed from the nominative by adding the termination *-n*. This
is merely to distinguish between subject and object. The accusative form
is also used to indicate motion towards, etc.


The Adjective.

All adjectives end in the nominative singular in *a*. They may be placed
either before or after the noun. As in the case of the noun, the plural
is formed by adding the termination *-j*, and the accusative is formed
by adding *-n* to the nominative. The adjective agrees in number and
case with the noun which it qualifies. Ex.:--

    Blua libro (_or_ libro blua), _a blue book_; bluaj libroj, _blue books_.
    La viro legas bluan libron. _The man reads a blue book._
    La viroj legas bluajn librojn. _The men are reading blue books._

Thanks to the accusative case, one might say without loss of clearness:
Bluan libron legas la viro, _or_ la viro bluan libron legas, _or_ bluan
libron la viro legas, etc.


Degrees of Comparison.

There are three degrees of comparison, as in English:

The POSITIVE, as _bona_, good; _bela_, beautiful; _granda_, big, great.

The COMPARATIVE is formed by placing _pli_ (more) or _malpli_ (less)
before the positive, thus: _bona_, good--_pli bona_, better; _bela_,
beautiful--_malpli bela_, less beautiful. The comparison may be
heightened by using _multe_ (much), thus: _multe pli_ (or _malpli_)
_bela_.

_Than_ is translated by _ol_, thus: _pli_ (or _malpli_) _bela ol_...,
more (_or_ less) beautiful than...

The SUPERLATIVE degree is formed by using _plej_ (most) with the
positive; as _bela_, beautiful--_plej bela_, most beautiful.

_Of_ with a superlative is translated by the preposition _el_ (out of).
_La plej granda el ĉiuj_, the greatest of all.

_The more...the more_, _the less...the less_, are translated by means of
the particles _ju_ and _des_. Thus: _Ju pli oni studas, des pli oni
lernas_, the more one studies, the more one learns. _Ju pli mi kun li
parolas, des malpli mi lin estimas_, the more I speak to him, the less I
esteem him.


Cardinal Numbers.

The CARDINAL NUMBERS may be used as _nouns_, by the addition of the
ending *-o*. Thus, _unuo_, a unit; _trio_, a trio; _dekduo_, a dozen;
_dudeko_, a score; _cento_, a hundred; _milo_, a thousand. Note that
_miliono_ is ALWAYS used as a noun.

When a number or any other word is used as a noun of quantity, the noun
which follows it must be preceded by the quantitative preposition
*da*:--_Dekduo da ovoj_, a dozen eggs; _milo da soldatoj_, a thousand
soldiers (one might of course also say _dek du ovoj_, _mil soldatoj_);
_du metroj da drapo_, two metres of cloth; _tri funtoj da sukero_, three
pounds of sugar.


Ordinal Numbers.

The ORDINAL NUMBERS are formed by adding the adjectival ending *-a* to
the Cardinals. In Compound Ordinal Numbers, the groups of hundreds,
tens, units, etc., are _joined by hyphens_, and the ending *-a* is added
to the unit numeral. Thus: _unu_, one--_unua_, first; _tria_, third;
_dek-unua_, eleventh; _tridek-sepa_, thirty-seventh;
_kvarcent-sesdek-dua_, 462nd, and so on. Written in figures these would
be _1a_, _3a_, _11a_, _37a_, _462a_. The Ordinals are of course
inflected like adjectives. (See section "The Adjective".)


Fractions

FRACTIONALS are formed by adding the suffix *-on* (plus the endings *o*,
*a*, or *e* as required) to the Cardinal Numbers. Thus: _unu duono_,
one-half; _tri kvaronoj_, three-quarters; _dek sep dek-naŭonoj_, 17/19;
_dudek tri kvarmil-kvincent-tridek-naŭonoj_, 23/4539. _Duone vera_ (or
_duonvera_), half-true. _Tri-kvaronoj da funto_ (or _trikvaronfuntoj_),
3/4 lb. _Duono da funto_ (or _duonfunto_), 1/2 lb.


Multiples, Collectives, and Distributives.

MULTIPLE Numbers are formed from the Cardinals by adding the suffix
*-obl*, with the requisite grammatical ending *o*, *a*, or *e*. Thus:
_duobla_, double; _duoblo_, a double; _duoble_, doubly; _tridekoble_,
thirty-fold; _sesoble naŭ estas_ (or _faras_) _kvindek kvar_, six nines
are fifty-four; _duoble du estas kvar_, twice two are four.

COLLECTIVE Numerals are formed by the addition of the suffix *-op* (plus
the grammatical termination required). Thus: _duope_, two at a time, two
together; _naŭope_, nine at a time; _ili venadis dekope_, they came in
tens; _dumilopa taĉmento_, a detachment two thousand strong.

DISTRIBUTIVES are shown by the preposition _po_, meaning _at the rate
of_. Thus: _li aĉetis por ĉiu infano po ses pomoj_, he bought six apples
for each child; _li ricevas po dek ŝilingoj por ĉiu tago_, he gets ten
shillings a day; _la vagonaro veturas po sesdek mejloj en ĉiu horo_ (or
_ĉiuhore_), the train travels at (the rate of) sixty miles an hour, etc.


The Pronoun.

The PERSONAL PRONOUNS are, in the nominative: _Mi_, I; _vi_, you (sing.
and pl.); _ni_, we; _li_, he; _ŝi_, she; _ĝi_, it; _ili_, they.

The archaic English _thou_ may be translated by _ci_.

The Accusative case of the personal pronouns is formed like that of
nouns and adjectives, by adding *-n*. Thus: _Min_, me; _vin_, you;
_nin_, us; _lin_, him; _ŝin_, her; _ĝin_, it; _ilin_, them.

The REFLEXIVE PRONOUN of the 3rd person is _si_ (accusative _sin_),
standing for _himself_, _herself_, _itself_, _one's-self_, or
_themselves_, as the case may be. There is no special reflexive form for
the pronouns of the 1st and 2nd person, _I_, _we_, and _you_.

The INDEFINITE PERSONAL PRONOUN is _oni_ (= the French _on_)--one,
people, they, you. Ex.: _Li amas sin_, he loves himself; _ŝi amas sin_,
she loves herself; _ĝi montras sin_, it shows itself; _ili diras al si_,
they say to themselves; _oni vidas sin_, one sees one's-self; _mi lavas
min_, I wash myself; _vi laŭdas vin_, you praise yourself.


Possessive Adjectives or Pronouns.

By adding the adjectival ending *-a* to the personal pronouns, the
POSSESSIVE Adjectives and Pronouns are obtained. Thus: _Mia_, my, mine;
_cia_, thy, thine; _via_, your, yours; _nia_, our, ours; _lia_, his;
_ŝia_, her, hers; _ĝia_, its; _sia_ (reflexive), his, her(s), its,
their(s), one's.

NOTE the following use of _sia_. In English the sentence, "He saw his
friend with his brother," is not clear. Does it mean that he saw his
friend (1) with his _friend's brother_, or (2) with his _own brother_?
In Esperanto, the use of _sia_ makes the meaning quite clear; (1) would
be: _Li vidis sian amikon kun LIA frato_, and (2) would be: _Li vidis
sian amikon kun SIA frato_.

The word _mem_, meaning _-self or -selves_, may be added to a personal
pronoun to give emphasis. Thus: _Konu vin mem_, know thyself; _li iris
mem_, he went himself; _li mem_, himself; _li parolis al si mem_, he
spoke to himself.

Like other adjectives, possessives agree in case and number with the
noun to which they refer. Ex.:

    _lia libro_, his book; _liaj libroj_, his books;
    _ŝi havas lian, kaj li havas ŝian_, she has his, and he has hers;
    _liaj estas la plej bonaj libroj_, his are the best books;
    _mi preferas miajn_, I prefer mine; _li preferas siajn_, he prefers his;
    _ili preferas siajn_, they prefer theirs.


Demonstrative Adjective or Pronoun.

The DEMONSTRATIVE Adjective and Pronoun "that" is rendered in Esperanto
by the word _tiu_ (acc. _tiun_); plural _tiuj_ (acc. _tiujn_), those.
The addition (either before or after) of the particle _ĉi_ to the
singular and plural respectively, gives _this_ and _these_. Ex.:

    _Tiu viro_, that man. _Tiu estas mia_, that (one) is mine.
    _Mi elektas tiun_, I choose that (one).
    _Mi preferas tiun ĉi_ (or _ĉi tiujn_), I prefer this (one).
    _Tiuj ĉi_ (or _ĉi tiuj_) _estas miaj_, these are mine.
    _Mi portos tiujn ĉi_, I will carry these.


Interrogative Pronouns.

_Kiu?_--who, which? Plural, _kiuj?_ _Kio?_--what? _Kies?_--whose? _Al
kiu?_--to whom? _Kiun?_--whom? (acc.), _kiujn?_ (acc. plu.). Ex.:

    _Kiu estas tiu?_--who is that?
    _Kiun vi deziras vidi?_--whom do you desire to see?
    _Kiuj foriris?_--which (ones) went away?
    _Kiujn vi vidis?_--which ones did you see?

_Kiu_ is also used with ADJECTIVAL meaning. Thus: _Kiu libro estas
via?_--which book is yours? _Kiun libron vi preferas?_--which book do
you prefer? _Kiuj domoj apartenas al vi?_--which houses belong to you?
_Kiujn stratojn vi konas?_--which streets do you know? _Kio estas
tio?_--what is that? _Kion li volas?_--what does he want?

The English _-ever_ is translated by _ajn_. For example: _Kiu ajn li
estas, ne parolu al li_, whoever he be, do not speak to him. _Kies ajn_,
whosesoever. _Kiu(j)n ajn_, whomever.


Relative Pronouns.

The Relative Pronouns are identical with the Interrogative: _Kiu(j)_,
who, that, which, _kiu(j)n_, whom, that, which. Ex.:

    _La libro, kiun vi legas_, the book (which) you are reading.
    _Tiu, kiu parolis al vi_, the one who spoke to you.
    _La personoj, kiujn li konas_, the persons (whom) he knows.
    _Tio, kion li diras, ne estas vera_, what he says is not true.
    _La arbo, kies supron vi vidas_, the tree whose top you can see.


Indefinite Pronouns.

    _iu_ (acc. _iun_), anyone, someone or other;
    _ies_, anyone's, someone's;
    _iuj_ (acc. _iujn_), any persons, some persons or other;
    _io_ (acc. _ion_), anything, something.

    _ĉiu_ (acc. _ĉiun_), everyone, each;
    _ĉies_, everyone's, everybody's, each one's;
    _ĉiuj_ (acc. _ĉiujn_), everybody, all;
    _ĉio_ (acc. _ĉion_), everything, all.

    _neniu_ (acc. _neniun_), no one, nobody;
    _nenies_, no one's, nobody's;
    _nenio_ (acc. _nenion_), nothing, not anything.

NOTE.--_Iu_, _ĉiu_, and _neniu_ are also used with nouns. Thus: _Kiun
libron vi deziras?_ Which book do you desire? _Iun ajn libron._ Any
book. _Iu homo_, any man, some man or other. _Ĉiu bona patro amas siajn
infanojn_, every good father loves his children. _Ĉiuj liaj amikoj_ (or
_ĉiu lia amiko_), all his friends, every friend of his. _Mi renkontis
neniun amikon_, I met no friend.

Other PRONOMINAL WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS are:

_multaj(n)_, many; _multo(n)_, much; _malmultaj(n), malmulte da..._, a
few. Ex.: _malmultaj personoj_, few persons; _malmulte da scio_, little
knowledge.

_kelkajn_, some, several; _kelke da..._, some. Ex.: _kelkaj personoj_,
some persons, several persons; _kelke da libroj_, some (quantity of)
books.

_alia(n)_, another, other; _aliaj(n)_, others. Ex.: _ili parolis unu al
alia_, they spoke to one another; _ni parolis unu al la alia_, we spoke
to each other; _unu aŭ la alia taŭgos_, either (one or the other) will
do; _nek unu nek la alia konvenas_, neither (one nor the other) is
suitable.

_ambaŭ_ (invariable), both. Ex.: _ambaŭ venis_, both came; _mi konas
ambaŭ fratojn_, I know both brothers; _mi vidis ilin ambaŭ_, I saw both
of them; _mi ŝatas ambaŭ_, I like both.


The Verb.


Tenses.

The VERB in Esperanto has three main Tenses--the Present, Past, and
Future. These are denoted by means of the verbal endings *-as*, *-is*,
and *-os*. Thus, from the root _vid_, see, are formed:

  Present.               | Past.                | Future.
  _mi vidas_, I see      | _mi vidis_, I saw    | _mi vidos_, I shall see


Moods.

Every Esperanto verb has three Moods--the Conditional, the Imperative,
and the Infinitive, which are formed respectively by means of the
endings *-us*, *-u*, and *-i*. Thus:

  Conditional.             | Imperative.     | Infinitive.
  _mi vidus_, I should see | _vidu_, see!    | _vidi_, to see

The CONDITIONAL Mood is used to express _supposition_; the three Tenses,
on the other hand, are used to express _facts_ or actual happenings.
(For examples, see §. "Conjunctions".)

The IMPERATIVE Mood is used to express an order, desire, wish, will,
etc. (See §. "Use of Imperative".) Used with the personal pronouns of
the 1st and 2nd persons, this mood corresponds to the English _let_,
used as an expression of a wish. Thus: _mi pensu_, let me think; _li
venu morgaŭ_, let him come to-morrow; _ili parolu_, let them speak.

NOTE that _let_ sometimes means _to allow, to give leave_, in which case
the verb _lasi_ is used. Thus: let (allow) him come, _lasu lin veni_;
leave it there, _lasu ĝin tie_.

The Imperative may be used interrogatively to translate the English
_shall_, with an idea of wish or desire. Thus:

  What shall I give you?       _Kion mi donu al vi?_
  What shall we do to-day?     _Kion ni faru hodiaŭ?_

_What will he do?_ would of course be simply _Kion li faros?_--for there
is here no question of desire or wish, but merely a question of future
action.

The INFINITIVE Mood is used to express the mere idea of the verb,
without any limit of person or number, and corresponds to the English
_to_ before the verb. Thus: _kuri_, to run; _paroli_, to speak.

NOTE.--In Esperanto, as is largely the case in English, the mood and
tense endings of the verb _do not vary_ according to person or number.
For instance: _mi vidas_, I see, _li vidas_, he sees; also _ni vidis_,
we saw, _ili vidis_, they saw; _vi vidos_, you will see; _oni vidos_,
one will see; _ŝi vidus_, she would see, _vi vidus_, you would see.


Participles.

There are in Esperanto _six_ participles, three active and three
passive, corresponding to three tenses. They are formed in the ACTIVE by
means of the endings *-ant*, *-int*, and *-ont*, and in the PASSIVE by
means of the endings *-at*, *-it*, *-ot*, with the addition of the
adjectival termination *-a*. Thus:

  ACTIVE.
    Present.          | Past.                  | Future.
    _vidanta_, seeing | _vidinta_, having-seen | _vidonta_, about-to-see

  PASSIVE.
    _vidata_,         | _vidita_,              | _vidota_,
       (being) seen   |   (having-been) seen   |   (about-to-be) seen

The PARTICIPLES may be used either as _Nouns_, _Adjectives_, or
_Adverbs_, the terminations *-o*, *-a*, *-e* being added to the
participial endings as required. When used as nouns or adjectives, they
of course take the sign of the Plural (*-j*) and of the Accusative
(*-n*) when the construction of the sentence so requires. Ex.:

  (1) ACTIVE. _En la venonta jaro_, in the coming year. _La parolanto_,
  the speaker. _La aŭskultantoj_, the audience (_lit._, listeners). _Mi
  vidis lin skribantan_, I saw him writing. _Li foriris kurante_, he
  went off at a run. _Li revenis ne vidinte sian amikon_, he returned
  without having seen his friend.

  (2) PASSIVE. _La ekzamenato_, the examinee. _La mortigitoj kaj
  vunditoj_, the killed and wounded. _Estimata sinjoro_, dear (_lit._,
  esteemed) sir. _Frapote, li sin defendis_, about to be struck, he
  defended himself. _Mi aŭdis tiun himnon kantatan_, I heard that hymn
  sung.


Compound Tenses.

The COMPOUND TENSES are formed by means of the auxiliary verb *esti*, to
be. Thus, by the combination of the participles with the six tenses and
moods, we obtain thirty-six compound tenses, enabling us to express with
the utmost precision any time-relation whatsoever. We have in all:

  _li estas_, or _estis_, or _estos_  { _vidanta_ or _vidata_
  or _estus_, or _estu_,  or _esti_   { _vidinta_ or _vidita_
                                      { _vidonta_ or _vidota_

The use of the participles is very easy when once one grasps the fact
that the auxiliary _esti_ serves to denote the particular division of
time, or the particular manner, of the occurrence of the action denoted
by the participle. Ex.:

  _Li estis skribanta, kiam mi vidis lin_, he was writing when I saw him.
  _Li estis fininta, kiam mia amiko alvenis_, he had finished (_lit._,
    was having finished) when my friend arrived.
  _Mi estis tuj forironta, kiam vi aperis_, I was just about to go out
    when you appeared.
  _Li estas nunmomente parolanta_, he is speaking at this very moment.
  _Li estas mortonta_, he is about to die.
  _Li estus jam foririnta_, he would have already departed (_lit._,
    would be already gone away).

The word _by_ after a Passive is translated by the preposition *de*.
Thus: The wood was being chopped by the boy, _la ligno estis hakata de
la knabo_. He has been seen by all, _li estas vidita de ĉiuj_.

NOTE.--The COMPOUND TENSES should not be used if the SIMPLE TENSES
suffice to show the meaning clearly. Thus, _I have seen him_ is more
neatly expressed by _mi jam vidis lin_ than by _mi estas vidinta lin_.
_Li jam foriris_ might stand for either _he had gone_ or _he has gone_,
according to circumstances, and the context would clearly show which was
meant. _Li parolas_ is generally quite right for _he is speaking_. _Li
estas parolanta_ should be used only when it is particularly intended to
show that he is _actually engaged_ in the act of speaking.


The Adverb.

In Esperanto, ADVERBS are denoted by the ending *-e*, and may be placed
in any position, either before or after the verb. Thus: _bela_,
beautiful--_bele_, beautifully; _vera_, true--_vere_, truly. _Li parolas
saĝe_, he speaks wisely. _Li rapide kuras_, he runs quickly.


Adverbial Numbers.

ADVERBIAL NUMBERS are formed by adding *-e* to the Cardinals. Thus:
_unue_ (_1e_), firstly; _trie_ (_3e_), thirdly; _sepe_ (_7e_), etc.


The Preposition.

In English, one preposition often has many different meanings. In
Esperanto, on the contrary, every preposition, with the exception of the
word _je_, has one precise and fixed meaning.

The preposition *je* is the only one in Esperanto without a definite
meaning. It sometimes happens that one wishes to use a preposition of
some sort or other, but is uncertain just which preposition will
precisely express the idea. In such cases _je_ is used. Thus: He laughed
_at_ me, _li ridis je mi_; full _of_ water, _plena je akvo_; six metres
long, _longa je ses metroj_; fear _of_ him, _timo je li_, etc.

_Je_ should not be abused. Its too frequent use is a mark of the
beginner in the language.


Use of Accusative.

When there is no ambiguity to be feared, the preposition _je_, and even
other prepositions, are often omitted in Esperanto; and the word to
which the preposition, if expressed, would have referred is put into the
accusative. Thus, instead of saying _li ridas je mi_ (he is laughing at
me), one might say _li ridas min_; similarly, _du metrojn alta_ would
stand for _alta je du metroj_. _Ĝi kostis je tri ŝilingoj_ is more
usually expressed: _ĝi kostis tri ŝilingojn_. _Mi restis tie dum kvin
horoj_ (I stayed there for five hours) could be: _mi restis tie kvin
horojn_; and so on.

Certain prepositions, viz., _antaŭ_, before, _ĉe_, at, _en_, in, _sub_,
under, _sur_, on, _kontraŭ_, against, _super_, over, and _trans_,
across, are often used to denote _movement towards_, whereas of
themselves they only express _rest at_. In order to make it quite clear
whether motion or rest is intended, use is made of the accusative. Thus:
_li promenis en la urbo_, he took a walk _in_ the city; but _li promenis
en la urbon_, he took a walk _into_ the city. _Li kuris antaŭ mi_, he
ran (along) before or in front of me; but _li paŝis antaŭ min_, he
stepped in front of me; and so on.

ADVERBS are sometimes used with prepositional force. Thus: _proksime de
la domo_, near the house; _dekstre de la arbo_, on the right of the
tree, etc.


The Conjunction.

A full list of CONJUNCTIONS will be found on §. 37. The following
constructions should be noted:


Tenses after _Ke_ (that).

  _Mi vidis, ke ŝi ploras_, I saw (that) she was crying.
  _Mi sciis, ke li venos_, I knew that he _would_ come.
  _Mi sciis, ke li jam alvenis_, I knew (that) he had already arrived.
  _Li diris, ke se li estus tiel granda, kiel mi, li facile farus tion_,
    he said that if he were as tall as I, he would easily do that.

Note that in Esperanto the verb is put in the exact time or tense used
by the speaker. Thus: _mi ne sciis, ĉu li venos_, I did not know whether
he would (_lit._, will) come; _ili ne diris, ĉu ili vin renkontis_, they
did not say whether they had met you.


Use of Imperative.

After verbs expressing wish, intention, will, or desire, or command, the
verb following is put in the IMPERATIVE MOOD. Thus: _mi ordonas, ke li
venu_, I order that he come (him to come); _mi tre deziris, ke li vivu_,
I very much wanted him to live; _ili intencis, ke ni perdu_, they
intended us to lose. Here the actual expressions used were: _li venu_,
_li vivu_, _ili perdu_.


Use of Conditional after _Se_.

  _Se vi tiel diris, vi malprave faris_, if you spoke thus you did
    wrongly.
  _Se vi tiel dirus, vi estus malprava_, if you said (were to say) thus,
    you would be wrong.
  _Se vi venos, vi vidos_, if you (will) come, you will see.


Interjections.

The following are the principal INTERJECTIONS:

  _adiaŭ!_                      adieu! farewell!
  _ah!_                         ah!
  _antaŭen!_                    forward!
  _atentu!_                     look out!
  _bis!_                        encore!
  _bone!_                       good!
  _certe!_                      certainly!
  _ĉu ne?_ or _ĉu ne vere?_     is not that so?
  _ĉu vere?_                    is that so?
  _efektive!_                   indeed!
  _fi!_                         fie!
  _for!_                        away! be off!
  _ha!_                         ha!
  _halt!_                       halt!
  _he!_                         hey! halloo!
  _ho!_                         oh!
  _ho ve!_                      alas!
  _hontinde!_                   shameful!
  _jen!_                        there!
  _kompreneble!_                naturally! of course!
  _ne!_                         no!
  _neeble!_                     impossible!
  _nu!_                         well!
  _rapide!_                     quick!
  _rapidu!_                     hurry up!


Formation of Words.

In Esperanto, considerable use is made of prefixes and suffixes, every
one of which has a clear, fixed meaning. Great economy of vocabulary is
thus effected, one root-word in Esperanto sufficing, when modified by
suitable affixes, to translate many English words. Many of the affixes
are often met with as single words. In such cases the English
translation is added after the various examples of the affix in
question.


Prefixes.

*bo-* denotes RELATIONSHIP BY MARRIAGE: _patro_, father, _bopatro_,
father-in-law; _filo_, son, _bofilo_, son-in-law.

*dis-* denotes SEPARATION: _ĵeti_, to throw, _disĵeti_, to scatter,
throw about; _peli_, to drive along, _dispeli_, to dispel, _fali_, to
fall, _disfali_, to fall apart, fall to pieces.

*ek-* denotes a BEGINNING OF AN ACTION, a MOMENTARY ACTION: _iri_, to
go, _ekiri_, to begin to go, to start; _brili_, to shine, _ekbrili_, to
begin to shine, to flash.

*ge-* denotes the TWO SEXES TAKEN TOGETHER: _patro_, father, _gepatroj_,
father and mother, parents; _frato_, brother, _gefratoj_, brother(s) and
sister(s); _Gesinjoroj B._, Mr. and Mrs. B.

*mal-* denotes the OPPOSITE OF AN IDEA: _bona_, good, _malbona_, bad;
_ŝati_, to like, _malŝati_, to dislike; _amiko_, friend, _malamiko_,
enemy; _laŭta_, loud, _mallaŭte_, softly.--_Malo_, an opposite; _male_,
on the contrary.

*pra-* is a prefix of RELATIONSHIP, corresponding to the English FORE-,
GREAT-: _patro_, father, _prapatro_, forefather, ancestor; _avo_,
grandfather; _praavo_, great-grandfather; _nepo_, grandson, _pranepo_,
great-grandson.

*re-* denotes RETURN AND REPETITION: _iri_, to go, _reiri_, to go back,
or to go again; _repreni_, to take back; _revidi_, to see again.--_Ree_,
again.


Suffixes.

*-aĉ* denotes that a word is used in a BAD SENSE, with DISPARAGEMENT:
_domo_, a house, _domaĉo_, a hovel; _ridi_, to laugh, _ridaĉi_, to
sneer.

*-ad* denotes CONTINUATION OR DURATION of an action: _paroli_, to speak,
_paroladi_, to make a speech; _kanto_, a song, _kantado_, singing;
_vojaĝo_, a voyage, _vojaĝado_, travelling; _rido_, a laugh, _ridado_,
laughter.

*-aĵ* denotes some CONCRETE THING characterized by the idea contained in
the root: _bela_, beautiful, _belaĵo_, a beautiful thing; _nutri_, to
feed, nourish, _nutraĵo_ (or _nutrantaĵo_), food; _ĝentila_, polite,
_ĝentilaĵo_, a polite act, act of politeness; _bovo_, ox, _bovaĵo_,
beef.--_Aĵo_, a thing.

*-an* denotes a PARTISAN OF, a MEMBER, an INHABITANT: _Kristo_, Christ,
_Kristano_, a Christian; _eklezio_, a church, _ekleziano_, a churchman;
_Londonano_, a Londoner.--_Ano_, a member.

*-ar* denotes a COLLECTION OF, a NUMBER OF: _arbo_, tree, _arbaro_, a
forest; _homo_, a human being, _homaro_, mankind; _vorto_, a word,
_vortaro_, a dictionary.--_Aro_, a collection, number, gathering.

*-ĉj* added to the first two to five letters of a word, is used to
denote MASCULINE DIMINUTIVES OF ENDEARMENT: _Johano_, John, _Joĉjo_,
Jack; _patro_, father, _paĉjo_, papa, daddy.

*-ebl* denotes POSSIBILITY, and corresponds to the English suffixes
-ABLE, -IBLE: _kredi_, to believe, _kredebla_, credible; _videbla_,
visible; _al_, to, _iri_, to go, _alirebla_, accessible.

*-ec* denotes ABSTRACT IDEAS, QUALITIES and corresponds to the English
suffixes -NESS, -SHIP, etc.: _feliĉa_, happy, _feliĉeco_, happiness;
_alta_, high, _alteco_, height; _reĝo_, king, _reĝeco_, kingship.

*-eg* denotes AUGMENTATION, INTENSITY OF DEGREE: _granda_, big, great,
_grandega_, enormous; _bela_, beautiful, _belega_, magnificent; _ŝtono_,
stone, _ŝtonego_, rock; _pafilo_, a gun, _pafilego_, cannon.

*-ej* denotes a PLACE SPECIALLY SET APART FOR or allotted to: _preĝi_,
to pray, _preĝejo_, church; _manĝi_, to eat, _manĝejo_, refectory;
_kuirejo_, kitchen; _enirejo_, entrance; _elirejo_, exit.

*-em* denotes PROPENSITY, INCLINATION, DISPOSITION: _paroli_, to talk,
_parolema_, talkative; _mensogi_, to lie, _mensogema_, untruthful.

*-er* denotes an ELEMENT OF, a UNIT, a GRAIN: _polvo_, dust, _polvero_,
a grain of dust; _fajrero_, a spark; _hajlero_, hailstone; _mono_,
money, _monero_, a coin.--_Ero_, particle, grain, element.

*-estr* denotes a CHIEF, LEADER, HEAD: _regno_, state; _regnestro_, head
of the state, ruler; _lernejo_, school, _lernejestro_,
head-master.--_Estro_, leader, chief; _estraro_, the authorities;
_estri_, to act as chief.

*-id* denotes a DESCENDANT, OFFSPRING, YOUNG OF: _bovo_, ox, _bovido_,
calf; _ŝafo_, a sheep, _ŝafido_, lamb; _Izraelido_, Israelite; _la
homidoj_, the sons of man; _Sro. Brown kaj la Brownidoj_, Mr. Brown and
the little Browns.--_Ido_, a descendant, child; _idaro_, descendants,
offspring.

*-et* denotes DIMINUTION OF DEGREE (compare _-eg_ above): _bela_,
beautiful, _beleta_, pretty; _venteto_, breeze; _ridi_, to laugh,
_rideti_, to smile; _bona_, good, _boneta_, fairly good,
mediocre.--_Eta_, tiny.

*-ig* denotes a MAKING, RENDERING, CAUSING TO BE: _granda_, great,
_grandigi_, to enlarge; _venigi kuraciston_, to send for (cause to come)
a doctor; _halti_, to stop (intr.), _haltigi_, to stop (tr.); _tranĉigi
al si la harojn_, to get one's hair cut.--_Igi_, to make, render.

*-iĝ* denotes a BECOMING, GETTING, GROWING, BEING MADE: _hela_, bright,
_heliĝi_, to grow or become bright; _ruĝa_, red, _ruĝiĝi_, to redden,
blush; _disiĝi_, to separate (intr.).--_Iĝi_, to become.

With transitive verbs _iĝ-_ is used to make intransitive verbs, thus:
_renversi_, to overthrow, turn upside down, _renversiĝi_, to turn
(intr.) upside down, to get overthrown; _fari_, to make, _fariĝi_, to
become; _perdiĝi_, to get lost; _vidiĝi_, to be seen.

Used with intransitive verbs, _iĝ-_ gives the idea of a becoming, a
GRADUAL TRANSITION from one state to another: _morti_, to die,
_mortiĝi_, to become dead, to die away, to expire; _sidi_, to be seated,
_sidiĝi_, to become seated, to sit down.

NOTE that, since verbs in _-iĝ_ are of necessity intransitive, their
participles should only be used in the ACTIVE FORM. Thus:
_renversiĝ_*inta*, having become overthrown, and not _renversiĝ_*ita*;
_perdiĝ_*inta*, having become lost, not _perdiĝ_*ita*; and so on. One
might of course simply say _renversita_, overthrown, and _perdita_,
lost, though the meaning would in that case not be quite the same.

*-il* denotes an INSTRUMENT, TOOL, or MEANS: _tranĉi_, to cut,
_tranĉilo_, a knife; _filtri_, to filter, _filtrilo_, a filter; _teni_,
to hold, _tenilo_, a handle.--_Ilo_, tool, instrument; _ilaro_, set of
tools.

*-ind* denotes WORTHINESS (English -WORTHY): _laŭdi_, to praise,
_laŭdinda_, praiseworthy; _vidinda_, worth seeing, _vidindaĵoj_, things
worth seeing, sights.--_Inda (je)_, worthy (of); _indeco_, worthiness.

*-ing* denotes the HOLDER OF A SINGLE OBJECT (compare _-uj_ below):
_plumo_, pen, _plumingo_, penholder; _fingro_, finger, _fingringo_,
thimble; _cigaringo_, cigar-holder.--_Ingo_, a socket, holder.

*-in* denotes FEMININES: _viro_, a man, _virino_, a woman; _patro_,
father, _patrino_, mother.--_Ino_, a female.

*-ist* denotes TRADE, OCCUPATION, PROFESSION: _labori_, to work,
_laboristo_, workman; _kuraci_, to treat (medically), _kuracisto_,
doctor.

*-nj* added to the first two to five letters of a word, is used to form
FEMININE DIMINUTIVES OF ENDEARMENT (compare _-ĉj_ above): _Johanino_,
Jane, _Johanjo_, Jenny; _patrino_, mother, _panjo_, mamma.

*-uj* denotes a RECEPTACLE which contains or bears a COLLECTION OR A
QUANTITY of things or material (compare _-ing_ above): _mono_, money,
_monujo_, purse; _inko_, ink, _inkujo_, inkstand.--_Ujo_, a utensil
case, bin.

The suffix _-uj_ is also used to denote TREES bearing certain fruits:
_pomo_, apple, _pomujo_, apple-tree; _ĉerizujo_, cherry-tree; _rozujo_,
rose-bush. The word _arbo_, however, is more frequently used in such
cases: _pomarbo_, _rozarbeto_, etc.

_-Uj_ is also used to denote the NAMES OF COUNTRIES: _Anglo_,
Englishman, _Anglujo_, England; _Franco_, a Frenchman, _Francujo_,
France. (See footnote 4.)

*-ul* denotes a BEING CHARACTERISED BY THE IDEA CONTAINED IN THE
ROOT-WORD: _bela_, beautiful, _belulino_, a beautiful woman, a beauty;
_kulpo_, blame, _kulpulo_, culprit; _laŭdindulo_, one worthy to be
praised; _bonulo_, a good fellow; _bonegulo_, a jolly good fellow.

*-um* is an INDEFINITE SUFFIX, like the word _je_ among the
prepositions, Thus: _pleni_, to fill, _plenumi_, to fulfil (compare
_plenigi_, to fill); _kolo_, neck, _kolumo_, collar; _aero_, air,
_aerumi_, to air (a room, clothes, etc.).

[Words containing _-um_ should be learnt as independent roots.]


Compound Words.

In Esperanto, any word can be combined with any other word or words to
form a compound word. Considerable use is made of prepositions for this
purpose. The requisite grammatical ending must of course be added in
each case. The student should carefully study the following words, and
also those given above, and endeavour to form words for himself.[9]
Ability to form words readily is absolutely necessary to fluent speech
or composition in the language. In the examples given below the
component parts of the words are separated by a small stroke ('), but
these are of course omitted in ordinary usage:

  _El'iri_,            to go out
  _antaŭ'ĉambro_,      antechamber
  _pri'pensi_,         to think over, reflect upon
  _preter'paŝi_,       to pass by
  _per'labori_,        to earn (gain by working)
  _per'forto_,         violence
  _tra'vivi_,          to live through, experience
  _supre'n'iri_,       to go up, ascend
  _inter'rompi_,       to interrupt
  _kun'veno_,          an assembly, meeting
  _al'paroli_,         to address, accost
  _inter'rilati_,      to relate one with another
  _inter'rilatoj_,     inter-relations
  _inter'nacia_,       international
  _skrib(o)'tablo_,    writing-table
  _dorm(o)'ĉambro_,    bedroom
  _naz'tuko_,          handkerchief
  _ter'tremo_,         earthquake
  _glit'iri_,          to skate
  _glit'veturilo_,     a sleigh
  _pied'ir'anto_,      a pedestrian
  _bru'fermi_,         to slam
  _facil'mova_,        agile, easy-moving
  _hom'amo_,           philanthropy
  _bon'far'anto_,      benefactor
  _strat'lanterno_,    street-lamp
  _bot'far'isto_,      bootmaker
  _sam'profesi'anoj_,  members of the same profession
  _ĉio'potenca_,       all-powerful
  _libr'amanto_,       a book-lover
  _doktor'edzino_,     doctor's wife
  _mon'akir'ilo_,      a means of getting money
  _ĉio'n'faranta_,     all-doing
  _alt'anima_,         high-souled
  _vivi'pova_,         capable of life
  _ali'landulo_,       foreigner
  _ali'maniere_,       in another way
  _tiu'speca_,         of that kind


CORRELATIVE WORDS.

  INDEFINITE     |Interrog. Rel. |Demonstrative |Distributive  |Negative
                 |  K            |  T           |  Ĉ           |  NEN
 QUALITY---------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IA           |  KIA          |  TIA         |  ĈIA         |  NENIA
  Some (kind of) |What (sort     |That sort of  |Each kind of  |No (kind
  Any (kind of)  |of)?           |Such (a)      |Every (kind   |of)
                 |               |              |of)           |
 REASON----------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IAL          |  KIAL         |  TIAL        |  ĈIAL        |  NENIAL
  For some       |For what       |For that      |For every     |For no
  reason. For    |reason? Why?   |reason        |reason. On    |reason. On
  any reason     |               |Therefore     |every account |no account
 TIME------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IAM          |  KIAM         |  TIAM        |  ĈIAM        |  NENIAM
  At some time   |At what time?  |At that time  |At all times  |At no time
  Sometimes,     |When?          |Then          |Always, each  |Never
  ever           |               |              |time          |
 PLACE-----------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IE           |  KIE          |  TIE         |  ĈIE         |  NENIE
  At any place   |At what place? |In that place |At each place |At no place
  Somewhere      |Where?         |There         |Everywhere    |Nowhere
 MANNER----------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IEL          |  KIEL         |  TIEL        |  ĈIEL        |  NENIEL
  In some way    |In what way?   |In that way   |In every way  |In no way
  anyhow         |How? Like, as  |So, thus, as  |In each way   |Nohow
 POSSESSION------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IES          |  KIES         |  TIES        |  ĈIES        |  NENIES
  Somebody's     |Whose?         |That one's    |Everyone's    |Nobody's
  Anybody's      |What person's? |That person's |Each one's    |No one's
 THING-----------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IO           |  KIO          |  TIO         |  ĈIO         |  NENIO
  Something      |What (thing)?  |That (thing)  |All           |Nothing
  Anything       |               |              |Everything    |Nought
 QUANTITY--------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IOM          |  KIOM         |  TIOM        |  ĈIOM        |  NENIOM
  Some           |How much?      |So much       |All           |None
  A little       |What Quantity? |That quantity |The whole     |
                 |               |              |quantity      |
 INDIVIDUALITY---+---------------+--------------+--------------+-----------
    IU           |  KIU          |  TIU         |  ĈIU         |  NENIU
  Anyone         |What person?   |That one      |Everyone,     |Nobody
                 |               |              |every         |No one




CONVERSATIONAL PHRASES AND SENTENCES.


38. Useful and Necessary Expressions. (_Utilaj kaj Necesaj Esprimoj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Do you speak       | _Ĉu vi parolas angle?_  | choo vee pahro'lahss
    English?         |                         |   ahn'gleh?
  I do not speak     | _Mi ne parolas angle._  | mee neh pahro'lahss
    English.         |                         |   ahn'gleh
  Is there anyone    | _Ĉu estas ĉi tie iu_,   | choo eh'stahss chee
    here who speaks  |   _kiu parolas          |   tee'eh ee'oo, kee'oo
    Esperanto?       |   Esperante?_           |   pahro'lahss
                     |                         |   espehrahn'teh?
  How long have you  | _Dum kiom da tempo vi   | doom kee'ohm dah
    learnt?          |   lernadis?_            |   tehm'po vi
                     |                         |   lehrnah'deess?
  A short time only  | _Dum nur mallonga       | doom noor mahl-lohn'gah
                     |   tempo_                |   tehmpo
  You have a good    | _Vi havas bonan         | vee ha'vahss boh'nahn
    accent           |   akcenton_             |   ahk-tsehn'ton
  I find the         | _Mi trovas la           | mee tro'vahss lah
    pronunciation    |   elparoladon tre       |   ehl-parolah'dohn treh
    very easy        |   facila_               |   faht-see'lah
  If you please      | _Se plaĉas_             | seh plah'chahss
  Thank you; thanks! | _Mi dankas; dankon!_    | mee dahn'kahss;
                     |                         |   dahn'kohn!
  I thank you        | _Mi dankas vin_         | mee dahn'kahss veen
  Much obliged       | _Vi estas tre kompleza_ | vee eh'stahss treh
                     |                         |   kohmpleh'zah
  Have the goodness  | _Havu la bonecon_       | hah'voo lah
                     |                         |   bo-neht'sohn
  Yes, sir           | _Jes, sinjoro_          | yehss, seen-yoh'roh
  Yes, miss          | _Jes, fraŭlino_         | yehss, frahw-lee'no
  No, madam          | _Ne, sinjorino_         | neh, seen-yoh-ree'no
  Allow me           | _Permesu (min)_         | pehrmeh'soo (meen)
  Bring me           | _Alportu al mi_         | ahlpohr'too ahl mee
  Do you understand? | _Ĉu vi komprenas?_      | choo vee
                     |                         |   kohmpreh'nahss?
  I do not           | _Mi ne komprenas_       | mee neh kohm-preh'nahss
    understand       |                         |
  I understand       | _Mi komprenas_          | mee kohm-preh'nahss
  Give me            | _Donu al mi_            | doh'noo ahl mee
  Send me            | _Sendu al mi_           | sehn'doo ahl mee
  Tell me            | _Diru al mi_            | deer'oo ahl mee
  Will you kindly    | _Ĉu vi afable dirus al  | choo vee ahfah'bleh
    tell me?         |   mi?_                  |   deer'ooss ahl mee?
  What do you say?   | _Kion vi diras?_        | kee'ohn vee deer'ahss?
  I beg your pardon  | _Mi petas vian          | mee peh'tahss vee'ahn
                     |   pardonon_             |   pahrdoh'nohn
  Speak louder       | _Parolu pli laŭte_      | pa-ro'loo plee
                     |                         |   lah'w-teh
  What did you ask?  | _Kion vi demandis?_     | kee'ohn vee
                     |                         |   deh-mahn'deess?
  What does it       | _Kion tio signifas?_    | kee'ohn tee'oh
    signify?         |                         |   signee'fahss?
  It is nothing      | _(Ĝi) estas nenio_      | (jee) eh'stahss
                     |                         |   neh-nee'o
  It is all the same | _Estas por mi           | ehstahss pohr mee
    to me            |   indiferente_          |   indifehrehn'teh
  Never mind         | _Ne zorgu pri tio_      | neh zor'goo pree tee'oh
  What is the        | _Kio estas?_            | kee'oh eh'stahss?
    matter?          |                         |
  Nothing            | _Nenio_                 | nehnee'oh
  It is all a        | _Estas pura eraro_      | eh'stahss poor'ah
    mistake          |                         |   ehrahr'oh
  What is it about?  | _Pri kio estas?_        | pree kee'oh eh'stahss?
  What is to be      | _Kion fari?_            | kee'ohn fahr'ee?
    done?            |                         |
  I haven't a notion | _Mi tute ne scias_      | mee too'teh neh
                     |                         |   stsee'ahs
  That depends       | _Tio dependas_          | tee'oh dehpehn'dahss
  I don't believe it | _Mi ne kredas ĝin_      | mee neh kred'ahss jeen
  Of course          | _Kompreneble_           | kohmpreh-neh'bleh
  On the contrary    | _Kontraŭe_              | kohntrah'weh
  Once for all       | _Unu fojon por ĉiam_    | oonoo foyohn por
                     |                         |   chee'ahm
  After all          | _Kiam ĉio estas         | kee'ahm chee'oh
                     |   konsiderita_          |   eh'stahss
                     |                         |   kohn-seedeh-ree'tah
  That is of no      | _Tio ne estas grava_    | tee'oh neh eh'stahss
    consequence      |                         |   grah'vah
  The other day      | _La alian tagon_        | lah ahlee'ahn tah'gohn
  At the end of a    | _Post unu jaro_         | post oo'noo yah'ro
    year             |                         |
  Between ourselves  | _Inter ni_              | in'tehr nee
  Everybody knows    | _Ĉiu scias_             | chee'oo stsee'ahss
  I remember it      | _Mi memoras tion_       | mee meh-mohr'ahss
                     |                         |   tee'ohn
  All at once        | _Subite_                | soobee'teh
  Sooner or later    | _Frue aŭ malfrue_       | froo'eh ahw mahlfroo'eh
  Ever so little     | _Tre tre malmulte_      | treh treh mahl-mool'teh
  You are joking     | _Vi ŝercas_             | vee shehrt'sahss
  You are right      | _Vi estas prava_        | vee eh'stahss pra'vah
  Leave me alone     | _Lasu min trankvila_    | lahsoo meen
                     |                         |   trahnkvee'lah
  Don't be angry     | _Ne koleru_             | neh ko-lehr'oo
  So much the more   | _Tiom pli_              | tee'ohm plee
  For want of time   | _Pro manko de tempo_    | pro mahn'ko deh tehm'po
  Take this          | _Prenu tion_            | preh'noo tee'ohn
  Make haste!        | _Rapidu!_               | rahpee'doo!
  Come along!        | _Venu!_                 | veh'noo!
  Take care!         | _Zorge!_                | zohr'gheh!
  Look out!          | _Atentu!_               | ahtehn'too!
  Listen!            | _Aŭskultu!_             | ahw-skool'too!
  Come in!           | _Eniru!_                | ehneer'oo!
  (Come) here!       | _(Venu) tien ĉi!_       | (veh'noo) tee'ehn chee!
  Go away!           | _Foriru!_               | for-eer'oo!
  This way           | _Tien ĉi_               | tee'ehn chee
  That way           | _Tien_                  | tee'ehn
  Too soon           | _Tro frue_              | tro froo'eh
  Too late           | _Tro malfrue_           | tro mahl-froo'eh
  Who is it calls    | _Kiu min vokas?_        | kee'oo meen vo'kahss?
    me?              |                         |
  What do you want?  | _Kion vi volas?_        | kee'ohn vee vo'lahss?
  Would you kindly?  | _Ĉu vi afable...?_      | choo vee ahfah'bleh...?
  Do your best       | _Faru vian eblon_       | fahroo vee'ahn eh'blohn
  It only depends    | _Tio dependas nur de    | tee'oh dehpehn'dahss
    upon you         |   vi_                   |   noor deh vee
  With all my heart  | _Kun mia tuta koro_     | koon mee'ah too'tah
                     |                         |   kohr'oh
  I am going to town | _Mi iras urbon_         | mee eer'ahss oor'bohn
  Are we going       | _Ĉu ni ien iras?_       | choo nee ee'ehn
    anywhere?        |                         |   eer'ahss?
  Where have you     | _De kie vi venis?_      | deh kee'eh vee
    come from?       |                         |   veh'neess?
  Don't go away      | _Ne foriru_             | neh for-eer'oo
  I shall go home    | _Mi iros hejmen_        | mee eer'ohss heh'y-mehn
  He has come back   | _Li revenis_            | lee rehveh'neess
  He has just come   | _Li ĵus eniris_         | lee zhooss ehneer'eess
    in               |                         |
  On horseback       | _Surĉevale_             | soor-chehvah'leh
  From top to bottom | _De supre ĝis malsupre_ | deh soo'preh jees
                     |                         |   mahl-soo'preh
  Upstairs           | _Supre_                 | soo'preh
  Downstairs         | _Malsupre_              | mahl-soo'preh
  In some way or     | _Iel_                   | ee'ehl
    other            |                         |
  In the meantime    | _Intertempe_            | in'tehr-tehm'peh
  First of all       | _Unue_                  | oonoo'eh
  That is just like  | _Jen ja via maniero!_   | yehn yah vee'ah
    you!             |                         |   mah-nee-ehr'oh!
  It is not my fault | _Mi ne estas kulpa pri  | mee neh eh'stahss
                     |   tio_                  |   kool'pah pree tee'oh
  That is what vexes | _Jen kio min kolerigas_ | yehn kee'oh meen
    me               |                         |   kol-ehree'gahss
  Don't imagine      | _Ne imagu (al vi),      | neh imah'goo (ahl vee),
    that...          |   ke..._                |   keh...
  What good is it?   | _Kion (ĝi) utilas?_     | kee'ohn jee
                     |                         |   ootee'lahss?
  Where was I?       | _Kie mi estis?_         | kee'eh mee eh'steess?
  As for me          | _Pri mi mem_            | pree mee mehm
  He began to laugh  | _Li komencis ridi_      | lee komehnt'seess
                     |                         |   ree'dee
  I cannot see any   | _Mi ne plu povas vidi_  | mee neh ploo po'vahss
    longer           |                         |   vee'dee
  Three are enough   | _Tri sufiĉas por mi_    | tree soofee'chahss pohr
    for me           |                         |   mee
  One is as good as  | _Unu estas tiel bona,   | oo'noo eh'stahss
    the other        |   kiel la alia_         |   tee'ehl bo'nah,
                     |                         |   kee'ehl la ah-lee'ah
  Will you give me?  | _Ĉu vi donos al mi?_    | choo vee doh'nohss ahl
                     |                         |   mee?
  Everything         | _Post plena             | post pleh'nah
    considered       |   konsiderado_          |   konsid-eh-rah'doh
  I can do without   | _Ĝi ne estas nepre      | jee neh eh'stahss
    it               |   necesa_               |   neh'preh nehtseh'sah
  I have been told   | _Oni diris al mi_       | o'nee deer'eess ahl mee
  I have come to     | _Mi venis por diri al   | mee veh'neess por
    tell you         |   vi_                   |   deer'ee ahl vee
  I am sure of it    | _Mi estas certa pri     | mee eh'stahss tsehr'tah
                     |   tio_                  |   pree tee'oh
  I don't think much | _Mi ne multe ŝatas ĝin_ | mee neh mool'teh
    of it            |                         |   shah'tahss jeen
  I have nothing to  | _Mi havas nenion por    | mee hah'vahss
    say against it   |   diri kontraŭ ĝi_      |   nehnee'ohn pohr
                     |                         |   deeree kohn-trahw jee
  As much as I can   | _Tiom, kiom mi povas_   | tee'ohm, kee'ohm mee
                     |                         |   po'vahss
  I like being here  | _Mi ŝatas esti tie ĉi_  | mee shah'tahss eh'stee
                     |                         |   tee'eh chee
  That comes to the  | _Tio estas la sama      | tee'oh eh'stahss la
    same thing       |   afero_                |   sahmah ahfeh'ro
  It answers the     | _Ĝi taŭgas por la celo_ | jee tah'w-gahss pohr la
    purpose          |                         |   tseh'lo
  I value it very    | _Mi tre alte taksas     | mee treh ahl'teh
    much             |   ĝin_                  |   tahk'sahss jeen
  I cannot do it     | _Mi ne povas fari ĝin_  | mee neh po'vahss
                     |                         |   fahr'ee jeen
  I am used to it    | _Mi kutimas tion_       | mee kootee'mahss
                     |                         |   tee'ohn


39. Expressions of Emotion, etc. (_Esprimoj de Emocio, k.t.p._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  What is it?        | _Kio estas?_            | kee'oh eh'stahss?
  Is it possible?    | _Ĉu (estas) eble?_      | choo (eh'stahss)
                     |                         |   eh'bleh?
  Indeed!            | _Ĉu vere!_              | choo vehr'eh!
  That is impossible | _Tio estas neebla_      | tee'oh eh'stahss
                     |                         |   neh-eh'blah
  That cannot be     | _Tio ne povas esti_     | tee'oh neh po'vahss
                     |                         |   eh'stee
  I am sorry for it  | _Mi bedaŭras tion_      | mee behdahw'rahss
                     |                         |   tee'ohn
  You surprise me    | _Vi surprizas min_      | vee soorpree'zahss min
  Oh, it's nothing!  | _Oh, estas nenio!_      | oh, eh'stahss
                     |                         |   nehnee'oh!
  I am quite vexed   | _Mi estas efektive      | mee eh'stahss
    about it         |   kolera pri ĝi_        |   ehfektee'veh
                     |                         |   ko-lehr'ah pree jee
  How vexing!        | _Kiel malagrable!_      | kee'ehl
                     |                         |   mahlah-grah'bleh!
  I am sorry         | _Mi tre bedaŭras_       | mee treh
                     |                         |   beh-dah'w-rahss
  What a pity!       | _Kiel domaĝe!_          | kee'ehl domah'jeh!
  It is a sad thing  | _Malĝoje estas_         | mahl-jo'yeh eh'stahss
  I am very glad     | _Mi tre ĝojas_          | mee treh jo'yahss
  It gives me much   | _Tio faras al mi multe  | tee'oh fah'rahss ahl
    pleasure         |   da plezuro_           |   mee mool'teh dah
                     |                         |   pleh-zoor'oh
  How beautiful!     | _Kiel bela!_            | kee'ehl beh'lah!
  What a shame!      | _Kia honto!_            | kee'ah hohn'toh!
  How could you do   | _Kiel vi povis tiel     | kee'ehl vee po'veess
    so?              |   fari?_                |   tee'ehl fah'ree?
  I am ashamed of    | _Mi hontas pri vi_      | mee hohn'tahss pree vee
    you              |                         |
  For shame!         | _Hontinde!_             | hohnteen'deh!
  You are very much  | _Vi estas tre kulpa_    | vee eh'stahss treh
    to blame         |                         |   kool'pa
  Don't apologise    | _Ne petu pardonon_      | neh peh'too
                     |                         |   pahr-dohn'ohn
  I beg (your)       | _Mi petas (vian)        | mee peh'tahss (vee'ahn)
    pardon           |   pardonon_             |   pahr-doh'nohn
  Pray don't mention | _Ne parolu pri tio, mi  | neh pahro'loo pree
    it               |   petas_                |   tee'oh, mee peh'tahss


40. Enquiries. (_Demandoj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Will you           | _Ĉu vi afable...?_      | choo vee ahfah'bleh...?
    kindly...?       |                         |
  Do you understand  | _Ĉu vi min komprenas?_  | choo vee meen
    me?              |                         |   kohm-preh'nahss?
  Do you hear me?    | _Ĉu vi aŭdas min?_      | choo vee ah'w-dahss
                     |                         |   meen?
  What is that?      | _Kio estas tio?_        | kee'oh eh'stahss
                     |                         |   tee'oh?
  What do you mean?  | _Kion vi volas diri?_   | kee'ohn vee vo'lahss
                     |                         |   deer'ee?
  Are you sure?      | _Ĉu vi estas certa?_    | choo vee eh'stahss
                     |                         |   tsehr'tah?
  Can I speak to     | _Ĉu mi povas paroli al  | choo mee po'vahss
    (see) Mr. A.?    |   (vidi) Sinjoro(n)     |   pah-ro'lee ahl
                     |   A.?_                  |   (vee'dee)
                     |                         |   seen-yohr'oh(n) A.?
  When does he       | _Kiam li revenos?_      | kee'ahm lee
    return?          |                         |   rehveh'nohss?
  Where is...?       | _Kie estas...?_         | kee'eh eh'stahss...?
  What do you call   | _Kiel vi nomas tion?_   | kee'ehl vee no'mahss
    that?            |                         |   tee'ohn?
  What does that     | _Kion tio signifas?_    | kee'ohn tee'oh
    mean?            |                         |   signee'fahss?
  What is that for?  | _Por kio estas tio?_    | pohr kee'oh eh'stahss
                     |                         |   tee'oh?
  Who is that?       | _Kiu estas tiu?_        | kee'oo eh'stahss
                     |                         |   tee'oo?
  Who is there?      | _Kiu estas tie?_        | kee'oo eh'stahss
                     |                         |   tee'eh?
  Is that Mr. A.?    | _Ĉu tiu estas Sinjoro   | choo tee'oo eh'stahss
                     |   A.?_                  |   seenyohr'oh A.?
  Which is the way   | _Kiu estas la vojo      | kee'oo eh'stahss la
    to...?           |   al...?_               |   vo'yo ahl...?
  How can I get      | _Kiel mi povas iri      | kee'ehl mee po'vahss
    to...?           |   al...?_               |   eer'ee ahl...?
  Is there a         | _Ĉu estas veturilo?_    | choo ehstahss
    conveyance?      |                         |   veh-toor-ee'lo?


41. Public Notices. (_Publikaj Avizoj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Apartments to let  | _Luebla apartamento_    | loo-eh'blah
                     |                         |   apart-ah-mehn'toh
  Dogs not admitted  | _Hundoj malpermesataj_  | hoon'doy
                     |                         |   mahlpehrmehsah'tahy
  Entrance; exit     | _Enirejo; elirejo_      | ehneereh'yo;
                     |                         |   eleereh'yoh.
  Fire alarm         | _Fajravertilo_          | fire-ahvehr-tee'lo
  Free library       | _Senpaga biblioteko_    | sehnpah'gah
                     |                         |   beebleeoh-teh'ko
  Furnished rooms    | _Meblitaj ĉambroj_      | mehblee'tahy chahm'broy
  Knock; ring        | _Frapu; sonorigu_       | frah'poo; so-nohree'goo
  No admittance      | _Eniro estas            | ehneer'oh eh'stahss
                     |   malpermesata_         |   mahlpehr-mehsah'tah
  No road            | _Trairo malpermesata_   | trah-eer'oh
                     |                         |   mahlpehr-mehsah'tah
  Keep off the grass | _Ne iru sur la herbo_   | neh eer'oo soor lah
                     |                         |   hehr'boh
  Refreshments       | _Bufedo_                | boo-feh'doh
  No smoking allowed | _Estas malpermesate     | estahss
                     |   fumi_                 |   mahlpehr-meh-sah'teh
                     |                         |   foo'mee
  Notice             | _Avizo_                 | ahvee'zo
  Please do not      | _Oni volu ne tuŝi_      | oh'nee vo'loo neh
    touch            |                         |   too'shee
  Please wipe your   | _Oni estas petata viŝi  | ohnee ehstahss
    feet             |   la piedojn_           |   pehtah'tah, vee'shee
                     |                         |   lah pee-eh'doyn
  Private            | _Privata_               | pree-vah'tah
  Pull; push         | _Tiru; puŝu_            | teer'oo; poo'shoo
  Road closed        | _Vojo fermita_          | vo'yo fehrmee'tah
  Unfurnished rooms  | _Senmeblaj ĉambroj_     | sen-meh'blahy
    to let           |                         |   chahm'broy
  Warning; caution   | _Averto; atentu_        | ahvehr'toh; ahtehn'too
  Danger(ous)        | _Danĝero_               | dahn-jehr'oh


42. Travelling: By Railway. (_Veturado: per la Fervojo._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 19.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  To the...station   | _Al la...stacio_        | ahl lah...staht-see'oh
  Get my luggage;    | _Alportu miajn          | ahlpohr'too mee'ahyn
    here is the      |   pakaĵojn; jen la      |   pakah'zhoyn; yehn lah
    ticket           |   bileto_               |   beeleh'toh
  Here is my luggage | _Jen miaj pakaĵoj_      | yehn mee'ahy pakah'zhoy
  Take it to the     | _Portu ilin al la       | pohr'too eeleen ahl la
    cloakroom        |   deponejo_             |   dehponeh'yo
  I wish to register | _Mi deziras registri    | mee dehzeer'ahss
    my luggage       |   miajn pakaĵojn al..._ |   reh-ghis'tree
    for...           |                         |   mee'ahyn pakah'zhoyn
                     |                         |   ahl...
  The luggage is     | _La pakaĵoj estas       | lah pakah'zhoy ehstahss
    overweight       |   preter la pezo        |   preh'tehr lah peh'zo
                     |   permesata_            |   pehr-mehsah'tah
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la fervoja   | kee'eh eh'stahss lah
    railway-station? |   stacio?_              |   fehrvo'yah
                     |                         |   staht-see'oh?
  -- booking-office? | -- _biletejo?_          | -- beeleh-teh'yo?
  -- enquiry office? | -- _informejo?_         | -- infohrmeh'yo?
  -- ladies'         | -- _atendejo de l'      | -- ahtehn-deh'yo dehl
    waiting-room?    |   sinjorinoj?_          |   seenyohree'noy?
  -- refreshment     | -- _bufedo?_            | -- boofeh'doh?
    room?            |                         |
  -- lavatory        | -- _necesejo?_          | -- neht-sehseh'yo?
    (w.c.)?          |                         |
  -- train for...?   | -- _vagonaro al...?_    | -- vahgo-nah'roh
                     |                         |   ahl...?
  Are you going by   | _Ĉu vi veturos per la   | choo vee vehtoor'ohss
    the express?     |   ekspreso?_            |   pehr la ekspreh'so?
  When does the      | _Kiam ekveturos la      | kee'ahm ekvehtoor'ohss
    train start?     |   vagonaro?_            |   lah vahgo-nahr'oh?
  Show me the        | _Montru al mi la        | mohn'troo ahl mee la
    timetable        |   horlibron_            |   hohr-lee'brohn
  Can I book through | _Ĉu mi povas havi       | choo mee po'vahss
    to...?           |   bileton rekte al...?_ |   hah'vee beeleh'tohn
                     |                         |   rek'teh ahl...?
  I want a           | _Mi deziras unuaklasan  | mee dehzeer'ahss
    first-class      |   bileton al..._        |   oon-oo'ah-klah'sahn
    (ticket) to...   |                         |   bee-leh'tohn ahl...
  Second return,     | _Duaklasan iro-reiran,  | doo'ah-klah'sahn
    Paris            |   Parizo_               |   eer'o-reh-eer'ahn,
                     |                         |   pahree'zo
  Two third singles, | _Du triaklasajn         | doo tree'ah-klah'sahyn
    Rome             |   irbiletojn, Romo_     |   eer-beeleh'toyn,
                     |                         |   ro'mo
  One-and-a-half     | _Unu kaj duonon_        | oonoo kahy doo-oh'nohn
  What is the fare   | _Kiom kostas la veturo  | kee'ohm ko'stahss la
    to Bonn?         |   al Bonno?_            |   vehtoor'oh ahl bonno?
  What class, sir?   | _Kiu klaso, sinjoro?_   | kee'oh klah'so,
                     |                         |   seen-yohr'oh?
  How much is it?    | _Kiom estas?_           | kee'ohm eh'stahss?
  We want a sleeping | _Ni deziras dormkupeon_ | nee dehzeer'ahss
    carriage         |                         |   dorm-koopeh'ohn
  -- a corridor      | -- _koridoran vagonon_  | -- koridor'ahn
    carriage         |                         |   vahgo'nohn
  -- a carriage for  | -- _kupeon rezervitan   | -- koopeh'ohn
    ladies           |   al sinjorinoj_        |   rehzehrvee'tahn ahl
                     |                         |   seenyoree'noy
  -- a smoking       | -- _kupeon por          | -- koopeh'ohn pohr
    compartment      |   fumantoj_             |   foo-mahn'toy
  -- a non-smoking   | -- _kupeon por          | -- koopeh'ohn pohr
    compartment      |   nefumantoj_           |   neh-foomahn'toy
  -- platform        | -- _peronbiletojn_      | -- pehrohn'beeleh'toyn
    tickets          |                         |
  Is this the train  | _Ĉu tiu ĉi estas la     | choo tee'oo chee
    for...?          |   vagonaro por...?_     |   eh'stahss lah
                     |                         |   vahgonahr'o pohr...?
  Do I change        | _Ĉu mi devos vagonŝanĝi | choo mee deh'vohss
    anywhere on the  |   dum la veturo?_       |   vah-gohn-shahn'jee
    journey?         |                         |   doom la vehtoor'o?
  Where must I       | _Kie mi devas           | kee'eh mee deh'vahss
    change for...?   |   vagonŝanĝi por...?_   |   vahgohn-shahn'jee
                     |                         |   por...?
  Is this seat       | _Ĉu tiu ĉi loko estas   | choo tee'oo chee lo'ko
    engaged?         |   okupita?_             |   eh'stahss
                     |                         |   okoopee'tah?
  There is no room   | _Ne estas loko_         | neh eh'stahss lo'ko
  The train is just  | _La vagonaro tuj        | la vahgo-nahr'o too'y
    going to start   |   ekveturos_            |   ehk-veh-toor'ohss
  Call the guard     | _Alvoku la konduktoron_ | ahlvo'koo lah
                     |                         |   kondooktohr'ohn
  Open the window    | _Malfermu la fenestron_ | mahlfehr'moo la
                     |                         |   fehneh'strohn
  Close the door     | _Fermu la pordon_       | fehr'moo la pohr'dohn
  Here is a station  | _Jen estas stacio_      | yehn eh'stahss
                     |                         |   stahtsee'oh
  Do we stop here?   | _Ĉu ni haltas ĉi tie?_  | choo nee hahl'tahss
                     |                         |   chee tee'eh?
  Do we get out      | _Ĉu ni devas tie ĉi     | choo nee deh'vahss
    here?            |   elvagoniĝi?_          |   tee'eh chee
                     |                         |   ehlvahgonee'jee?
  Do we change       | _Ĉu ni devas vagonŝanĝi | choo nee deh'vahss
    carriages here?  |   ĉi tie?_              |   vahgohn'shahn-jee
                     |                         |   chee tee'eh?
  How long do we     | _Dum kiom da tempo ni   | doom kee'ohm dah
    stop here?       |   haltos ĉi tie?_       |   tehm'po nee
                     |                         |   hahl'tohss chee
                     |                         |   tee'eh?
  Give up your       | _Donu vian bileton_     | doh'noo vee'ahn
    ticket           |                         |   beeleh'tohn
  Here it is!        | _Jen!_                  | yehn!
  My luggage is lost | _Miaj pakaĵoj estas     | mee'ahy pakah'zhoy
                     |   perditaj_             |   ehstahss pehrdee'tahy
  Take your seats!   | _Envagoniĝu!_           | ehnvahgonee'joo!
  Change for...!     | _Vagonŝanĝu por...!_    | vahgohn'shahnjoo
                     |                         |   por...!
  All change!        | _Ĉiuj elvagoniĝu!_      | chee'oohy
                     |                         |   ehlvah-gonee'joo!
  Show your tickets  | _Montru viajn biletojn_ | mohntroo vee'ahyn
                     |                         |   beeleh'toyn
  All tickets must   | _Ĉiu devas montri sian  | chee'oo dehvahss
    be shown         |   bileton_              |   mohntree see'ahn
                     |                         |   beeleh'tohn
  Tickets, please    | _La biletojn mi petas_  | la beeleh'toyn, mee
                     |                         |   pehtahss


43. Travelling: By Steamer. (_Veturado: per Vaporŝipo._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 20.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Is this the boat   | _Ĉu tiu ĉi estas la     | choo tee'oo chee
    for...?          |   ŝipo por...?_         |   eh'stahss la shee'po
                     |                         |   por...?
  Where is this boat | _Kien iras ĉi tiu       | kee'ehn eer'ahss chee
    going?           |   ŝipo?_                |   tee'oo shee'po?
  When do we start?  | _Kiam ni ekveturos?_    | kee'ahm nee
                     |                         |   ehkvehtoor'ohss?
  When shall we      | _Kiam ni alvenos?_      | kee'ahm nee
    arrive?          |                         |   ahl-veh'nohss?
  Time is up         | _Estas la horo_         | eh'stass la hohr'o
  Where is your      | _Kie estas viaj         | kee'eh eh'stahss
    luggage?         |   pakaĵoj?_             |   vee'ahy pakah'zhoy?
  Look for my things | _Serĉu miajn aĵojn_     | sehr'choo mee'ahyn
                     |                         |   ah'zhoyn
  There is another   | _Estas ankoraŭ unu      | eh'stahss ahnkohr'ahw
    trunk            |   kofro_                |   oo'noo ko'fro
  Let us go down     | _Ni malsupreniru en la  | nee mahlsoo'prehneer'oo
    into the cabin   |   kajuton_              |   ehn la kahyoo'tohn
  Where is my berth? | _Kie estas mia          | kee'eh eh'stahss mee'ah
                     |   dormujo?_             |   dohr-moo'yo?
  I want a cabin to  | _Mi deziras kajuton por | mee dehzeer'ahss
    myself           |   mi sola_              |   kahyoo'tohn por mee
                     |                         |   so'la
  Is the sea smooth? | _Ĉu la maro estas       | choo la mah'ro ehstahss
                     |   trankvila?_           |   trahnk-vee'la?
  The sea is rough   | _La maro estas          | la mah'ro estahss
                     |   maltrankvila_         |   mahltrahnk-vee'la
  It is blowing a    | _Ventegas_              | vehnteh'gahss
    gale             |                         |
  I feel sick        | _Mi sentas naŭzon_      | mee sehn'tahss
                     |                         |   nahw'zohn
  Can you get me     | _Ĉu vi povas havigi al  | choo vee povahss
    some tea?        |   mi iom da teo?_       |   havee'ghee ahl mee
                     |                         |   ee'ohm dah teh'oh?
  Call the           | _Alvoku la servistinon_ | ahlvo'koo la
    stewardess       |                         |   sehrvistee'nohn
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la           | kee'eh eh'stahss la
    steward?         |   provizisto?_          |   proveezist'o?
  Where are we now?  | _Kie ni estas nun?_     | kee'eh nee eh'stahss
                     |                         |   noon?
  We are nearly      | _Ni preskaŭ alvenis_    | nee preh'skahw
    there            |                         |   ahlveh'nees
  Passengers are     | _La pasaĝeroj estas     | la pahsah-jehr'oy
    requested to     |   petataj, ne restadi   |   eh'stahss
    keep clear of    |   sur la pasponteto_    |   pehtah'tahy, neh
    the gangway      |                         |   rehstah'dee soor la
                     |                         |   pahss'pohnteh'toh


44. At the Custom House. (_Ĉe la Doganejo._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Come to the        | _Venu al la doganejo_   | veh'noo ahl la
    custom-house     |                         |   doh-gahneh'yo
  The custom-house   | _La doganisto_          | lah doh-gahnist'oh
    officer          |                         |
  Have you your      | _Ĉu vi havas vian       | choo vee ha'vahss
    passport?        |   pasporton?_           |   veeahn pahsport'ohn?
  Will you examine   | _Ĉu vi vizitos tiun ĉi  | choo vee veezee'tohs
    this trunk?      |   kofron?_              |   tee'oon chee
                     |                         |   ko'frohn?
  Here are the keys  | _Jen la ŝlosiloj_       | yehn la shlo-see'loy
  Open it            | _Malfermu ĝin_          | mahl-fehr'moo jeen
  Unlock this box    | _Malfermu tiun ĉi       | mahl-fehr'moo tee'oo
                     |   skatolon_             |   chee skahtoh'lohn
  Can I remove it?   | _Ĉu mi povas nun        | choo mee po'vahss noon
                     |   forporti ĝin?_        |   forport'ee jeen?
  Have you anything  | _Ĉu vi havas ion        | choo vee hah'vahss
    to declare?      |   deklarindan?_         |   ee'ohn
                     |                         |   dehklarin'dahn?
  I have nothing     | _Mi havas nenion        | mee hah'vahss
    liable to duty   |   deklarindan_          |   nehnee'ohn
                     |                         |   dehklarin'dahn
  Have you any       | _Ĉu vi havas tabakon aŭ | choo vee ha'vahss
    tobacco or       |   cigarojn?_            |   tahbah'kohn ahw
    cigars?          |                         |   tsee-gah'royn?
  I have a few       | _Mi havas kelkajn       | mee ha'vahss kehl'kahyn
    cigars           |   cigarojn_             |   tsee-gah'royn
  Those are free     | _Pri tiuj vi ne devas   | pree tee'ooy vee neh
                     |   pagi_                 |   deh'vahss pah'ghee
  Is that all?       | _Ĉu tio estas ĉio?_     | choo tee'oh eh'stahss
                     |                         |   chee'oh?
  What is the duty?  | _Kiom estas la          | kee'ohm eh'stahss la
                     |   imposto?_             |   impoh'sto?
  Is my luggage      | _Ĉu oni vizitis miajn   | choo oh'nee
    passed?          |   pakaĵojn?_            |   veezee'teess mee'ahyn
                     |                         |   pakah'zhoyn?


45. Arrival. (_Alveno._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 19.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Call a cab         | _Venigu fiakron_        | vehnee'goo feeah'krohn
  Closed, open       | _Fermitan, malfermitan_ | fehrmee'tahn, mahl-
  I want a hansom    | _Mi bezonas duradan     | mee behzo'nahss
                     |   fiakron_              |   doo-rah'dahn
                     |                         |   feeah'krohn
  Get me a           | _Venigu kvarradan       | vehnee'goo
    four-wheeler     |   fiakron_              |   kvar-rah'dahn
                     |                         |   feeah'krohn
  Cab, sir?          | _Veturilon, sinjoro?_   | vehtooree'lohn,
                     |                         |   seenyo'ro?
  Put my luggage in  | _Metu miajn pakaĵojn en | meh'too mee'ahyn
    the cab          |   la fiakron_           |   pak-ah'zhoyn ehn la
                     |                         |   fee-ah'krohn
  Where do you want  | _Kien vi deziras iri,   | kee'ehn vee
    to go, sir?      |   sinjoro?_             |   dehzeer'ahss eer'ee,
                     |                         |   seen-yo'ro?
  Drive me to...     | _Veturigu min al..._    | vehtoo-ree'goo min
                     |                         |   ahl...
  Driver, what is    | _Veturigisto, po kiom   | vehtooreeg-ist'o, po
    the fare by the  |   kostas la veturo laŭ  |   kee-ohm ko'stahss la
    journey?         |   distanco?_            |   vehtoor'o lahw
                     |                         |   distahntso?
  By the hour?       | _Laŭhore?_              | lahw-ho'reh?
  Drive quickly      | _Veturigu rapide_       | vehtooree'goo
                     |                         |   rahpee'deh
  Drive slower       | -- _pli malrapide_      | -- plee mahlrahpee'deh
  Stop! Go on!       | _Haltu! Daŭrigu!_       | hahl'too! dahwree'goo!


46. 'Bus and Tram. (_Omnibuso kaj Tramveturilo._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 19.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Where can I get a  | _Kie mi povas trafi     | kee'eh mee po'vahss
    'bus to...?      |   omnibuson al...?_     |   trah'fee
                     |                         |   omnee-boo'sohn
                     |                         |   ahl...?
  Is there a 'bus    | _Ĉu oni povas omnibuse  | choo o'nee po'vahss
    to...?           |   veturi al...?_        |   omnee-boo'seh
                     |                         |   vehtoor'ee ahl...?
  We will take a     | _Ni iros omnibuse_      | nee eer'ohss
    'bus             |                         |   omneeboo'seh
  The tram station   | _La tramstacio_         | la trahm'staht-see'oh
  Cars stop here     | _Tramveturiloj haltas   | trahm'vehtoo-ree'loy
                     |   ĉi tie_               |   hahl'tahss chee
                     |                         |   tee'eh
  Does this car go   | _Ĉu tiu ĉi veturilo     | choo tee'oo chee
    to...?           |   iras al...?_          |   vehtoo-ree'lo
                     |                         |   eer'ahss ahl...?
  No, the next one   | _Ne, la sekvonta_       | neh, la sehkvohn'tah
  Wait till the car  | _Atendu, ĝis la         | ahtehn'doo, jees la
    stops            |   veturilo haltos_      |   vehtoo-ree'lo
                     |                         |   hahltohss
  Do you pass...?    | _Ĉu vi                  | choo vee
                     |   preterveturas...?_    |   preh'tehr-veh-
                     |                         |   too'rahss...?
  Put me down at...  | _Lasu min eliĝi ĉe..._  | lah'soo meen ehlee'jee
                     |                         |   cheh...
  Give me a ticket   | _Donu al mi bileton_    | doh'noo ahl mee
                     |                         |   beeleh'tohn
  Any more fares?    | _Ĉu ĉiuj pagis?_        | choo chee'ooy
                     |                         |   pah'gheess?
  Tickets, please    | _La biletojn, mi petas_ | la beeleh'toyn, mee
                     |                         |   peh-tahss
  Outside only       | _Nur ekstere_           | noor eksteh'reh
  Full inside        | _Plena interne_         | pleh'nah intehr'neh


47. Hotel and Rooms. (_Hotelo kaj Ĉambroj._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Which is the best  | _Kiu estas la plej bona | kee'oo ehstahss la
    hotel?           |   hotelo?_              |   plehy' bo'nah
                     |                         |   hoteh'lo?
  Furnished          | _Meblita apartamento_   | mehblee'tah
    apartments       |                         |   ahpartahmehn'toh
  Apartments to let  | _Luebla apartamento_    | loo-eh'blah
                     |                         |   ahpartahmehn'toh
  Unfurnished house  | _Nemeblita domo_        | nehmeh-blee'tah dohmo
  Can I see your     | _Ĉu mi povas vidi viajn | choo mee po'vahss
    rooms?           |   ĉambrojn?_            |   vee'dee vee'ahyn
                     |                         |   chahm'broyn?
  Let me see the     | _Montru al mi la        | mohn'troo ahl mee la
    room             |   ĉambron_              |   chahm'brohn
  What rooms do you  | _Kiujn ĉambrojn vi      | kee'ooyn chahm'broyn
    want?            |   bezonas?_             |   vee beh-zo'nahss?
  I want a bedroom   | _Mi bezonas             | mee behzo'nahss
    and sitting-room |   dormoĉambron kaj      |   dor'mo-chahm'brohn
                     |   salonon_              |   kahy saloh'nohn
  What is the price  | _Kioma estas la prezo   | kee'ohma eh'stahss la
    of this room?    |   de tiu ĉambro?_       |   preh'zo deh tee'oo
                     |                         |   chahm'bro?
  What do you        | _Kiom vi postulas?_     | kee'ohm vee
    charge?          |                         |   postoo'lahss?
  I want a cheaper   | _Mi deziras pli         | mee dehzeer'ahss plee
    one              |   malkaran_             |   mahl-kah'rahn
  That is too dear   | _Tio estas tro kara_    | tee'oh eh'stahss tro
                     |                         |   kah'rah
  Have you a         | _Ĉu vi havas dulitan    | choo vee hah'vahss
    double-bedded    |   ĉambron?_             |   doolee'tahn
    room?            |                         |   chahm'brohn?
  Are the beds       | _Ĉu la litoj estas bone | choo la lee'toy
    well-aired?      |   aerumitaj?_           |   eh'stahss bo'neh
                     |                         |   ah-ehroomee'tahy?
  We will take these | _Ni luos ĉi tiujn       | nee loo'ohss chee
    rooms            |   ĉambrojn_             |   tee'ooyn chahm'broyn
  How long do you    | _Dum kiom da tempo vi   | doom kee'ohm dah
    want them for?   |   ilin bezonos?_        |   tehm'po vee ee'leen
                     |                         |   behzo'nohss?
  We shall stay a    | _Ni restos dum unu      | nee reh'stohss doom
    week             |   semajno_              |   oo'noo sehmahy'no
  Are our rooms      | _Ĉu niaj ĉambroj estas  | choo nee'ahy chahm'broy
    ready?           |   pretaj?_              |   ehstahss prehtahy?
  Let us have supper | _Volu pretigu tuj nian  | vo'loo preh-tee'goo
    at once          |   vespermanĝon_         |   tooy nee'ahn
                     |                         |   vespehrmahn'john
  Have you a table   | _Ĉu vi havas komunan    | choo vee hah'vahss
    d'hôte?          |   manĝotablon?_         |   komoo'nahn
                     |                         |   mahn'joh-tah'blohn?
  Are there any      | _Ĉu estas leteroj por   | choo eh'stahss
    letters for me?  |   mi?_                  |   lehtehr'oy pohr mee?
  Can I have a warm  | _Ĉu mi povas havi       | choo mee po'vahss
    bath?            |   varman banon?_        |   ha'vee vahrmahn
                     |                         |   bahnohn?
  Give me the key of | _Donu al mi la ŝlosilon | doh'noo ahl mee la
    my room          |   de mia ĉambro_        |   shlosee'lohn deh
                     |                         |   mee'ah chahm'bro
  Bring me some warm | _Alportu al mi varman   | ahlport'oo ahl mee
    water            |   akvon_                |   vahrmahn ahk'vohn
  Where is the w.c.? | _Kie estas la           | kee'eh ehstahss la
                     |   necesejo?_            |   nehtsehseh'yo?
  Take my luggage    | _Portu miajn pakaĵojn   | port'oo mee'ahyn
    down             |   malsupren_            |   pakah'zhoyn
                     |                         |   mahl-soo'prehn
  Give me a candle   | _Donu al mi kandelon_   | doh'noo ahl mee
                     |                         |   kahndeh'lohn
  I have no matches  | _Mi ne havas alumetojn_ | mee neh hah'vahss
                     |                         |   ahloomeh'toyn
  Call me at seven   | _Veku min je la sepa_   | veh'koo min yeh la
                     |                         |   sehpah
  We leave early     | _Ni foriros frue        | nee foreer'ohss froo'eh
    to-morrow        |   morgaŭmatene_         |   mor'gahw-mahteh'neh
    morning          |                         |
  My bill, please    | _La kalkulon, mi petas_ | la kahlkoo'lohn, mee
                     |                         |   peh'tahss


48. Breakfast. (_Matenmanĝo._)

(For Vocabularies see §§. 4-6 & 14-15.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Is breakfast       | _Ĉu la matenmanĝo estas | choo la mahtehn-mahn'jo
    ready?           |   preta?_               |   eh'stahss preh'tah?
  Breakfast is ready | _La matenmanĝo estas    | la mahtehn-mahn'jo
                     |   preta_                |   eh'stahss preh'tah
  Is the tea made?   | _Ĉu la teo estas        | choo la teh'oh
                     |   farita?_              |   eh'stahss fahree'tah?
  Is the coffee      | _Ĉu la kafo estas       | choo la kah'fo
    strong enough?   |   sufiĉe forta?_        |   eh'stahss soofee'cheh
                     |                         |   fort'ah?
  We want more cups  | _Ni bezonas pluajn      | nee behzo'nahss
                     |   tasojn_               |   ploo'ahyn tah'soyn
  Take some more     | _Prenu iom plu da       | preh'noo ee'ohm ploo
    sugar            |   sukero_               |   dah sookeh'ro
  A piece of toast   | _Peco de rostita pano_  | peht'so deh ro-stee'tah
                     |                         |   pa'noh
  Do you drink tea   | _Ĉu vi trinkas teon aŭ  | choo vee trin'kahss
    or coffee?       |   kafon?_               |   tehohn ahw kah'fohn?
  Cold meat          | _Malvarma viando_       | mahl-vahr'ma
                     |                         |   vee-ahn'doh
  Will you take an   | _Ĉu vi manĝos ovon?_    | choo vee mahn'johss
    egg?             |                         |   o'vohn?
  A rasher of bacon  | _Tranĉo de lardo_       | trahn'cho deh lahr'doh
  These eggs are     | _Ĉi tiuj ovoj estas     | chee tee'ooy o-voy
    hard             |   malmolaj_             |   eh'stahss
                     |                         |   mahl-mo'lahy
  Pass me the butter | _Transdonu al mi la     | trahns-doh'noo ahl mee
                     |   buteron_              |   la bootehr'ohn
  Give me the salt   | _Donu al mi la salon_   | doh'noo ahl mee la
                     |                         |   sahlon
  Some rolls         | _Kelke da bulkoj_       | kehl'keh dah bool'koy
  This butter is not | _Tiu ĉi butero ne estas | tee'oo chee bootehr'oh
    fresh            |   freŝa_                |   neh ehstahss
                     |                         |   freh'shah
  Bring some more... | _Alportu iom plu da..._ | ahlport'oo ee'ohm ploo
                     |                         |   dah...
  Do you take milk   | _Ĉu vi deziras lakton   | choo vee dehzeer'ahss
    and sugar?       |   kaj sukeron?_         |   lahk'tohn kahy
                     |                         |   sookehr'ohn?
  No sugar, thank    | _Ne sukeron, mi dankas_ | neh sookehr'ohn, mee
    you              |                         |   dahn'kahss
  Coffee without     | _Kafo sen lakto_        | kah'fo sehn lahk'toh
    milk             |                         |
  Coffee with milk   | _Kafo kun lakto_        | kah'fo koon lahk'toh
  A little more      | _Iom plu da fiŝo?_      | ee'ohm ploo dah
    fish?            |                         |   fee'sho?
  Yes, please        | _Jes, mi petas_         | yehss, mee peh'tahss
  Nothing more       | _Nenion plu_            | nehnee'ohn ploo


49. Dinner. (_Ĉefmanĝo._)

(For Vocabularies see §§. 4-6 & 14-15.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  What time is       | _Je kioma horo estas la | yeh kee-oh'ma ho'ro
    dinner?          |   ĉefmanĝo?_            |   eh-stahss la
                     |                         |   chehfmahn'jo?
  When do you dine?  | _Je kioma horo vi       | yeh kee-oh'ma ho'ro vee
                     |   ĉefmanĝas?_           |   chehfmahn'jahss?
  We shall dine at   | _Ni ĉefmanĝos je la     | nee chehfmahn'johss yeh
    six o'clock      |   sesa_                 |   la seh'sah
  Give me (show me)  | _Donu (montru) al mi la | doh'noo (mohn'troo) ahl
    the bill-of-fare |   manĝokarton_          |   mee la
                     |                         |   mahn'jo-kar'tohn
  Waiter!            | _Kelnero!_              | kelnehr'oh!
  What have you      | _Kion vi havas preta?_  | kee'ohn vee hah'vahss
    ready?           |                         |   preh'tah?
  Have you any roast | _Ĉu vi havas rostitan   | choo vee hah'vahss
    beef?            |   bovaĵon?_             |   ro-stee'than
                     |                         |   bovah'zhohn?
  Are you hungry?    | _Ĉu vi malsatas?_       | choo vee mahlsah'tahss?
  I am hungry        | _Mi malsatas_           | mee mahlsah'tahss
  Are you thirsty?   | _Ĉu vi soifas?_         | choo vee so-ee'fahss?
  I am very thirsty  | _Mi tre soifas_         | mee treh so-ee'fahss
  What will you      | _Kion vi manĝos?_       | kee'ohn vee mahnjohss?
    take?            |                         |
  What shall I help  | _Kion mi donu al vi?_   | kee'ohn mee dohnoo ahl
    you to?          |                         |   vee?
  What soup will you | _Kian supon vi volas?_  | kee'ahn soo'pohn vee
    have?            |                         |   vo'lahss?
  Will you take some | _Ĉu vi prenos iom da    | choo vee preh'nohss
    soup?            |   supo?_                |   ee'ohm da soo'po?
  Well done; under   | _Elkuirita; ne          | ehlkoo-eeree'tah; neh
    done             |   elkuirita_            |   ehlkoo-eeree'tah
  Here are spinach   | _Jen spinako kaj        | yehn speenah'ko kahy
    and broccoli     |   brokolio_             |   brokohlee'oh
  Help yourself      | _Servu vin_             | sehr'voo veen
  It is excellent    | _Ĝi estas bonega_       | jee eh'stahss
                     |                         |   bo-neh'gah
  What fish have     | _Kiajn fiŝojn vi        | kee'ahyn fee'shoyn vee
    you?             |   havas?_               |   hah'vahss?
  Fried soles        | _Frititaj soleoj_       | fritee'tahy so-leh'oy
  Will you take some | _Ĉu vi deziras iom      | choo vee dehzeer'ahss
    more?            |   plu?_                 |   ee'ohm ploo?
  No, thank you      | _Ne, mi dankas_         | neh, mee dahn'kahss
  Change the plates  | _Ŝanĝu la telerojn_     | shahnjoo la tehlehr'oyn
  Give me a clean    | _Donu al mi puran       | doh'noo ahl mee
    fork             |   forkon_               |   poor'ahn fohr'kohn
  A clean knife      | _Pura tranĉilo_         | poorah trahnchee'lo
  Bring me a glass   | _Alportu al mi glason   | ahlport'oo ahl mee
    of water         |   da akvo_              |   glah'sohn dah ahk'vo
  Give me something  | _Donu al mi ion por     | doh'noo ahl mee ee'ohn
    to drink         |   trinki_               |   pohr trin'kee
  A bottle of wine   | _Botelo da vino_        | bo-teh'lo dah vee'no
  What wines will    | _Kiajn vinojn vi        | kee'ahyn vee'noyn vee
    you have?        |   deziras?_             |   dehzeer'ahss?
  Here is the list   | _Jen la listo_          | yehn la leest'oh
  This wine is flat  | _Tiu ĉi vino            | tee'oo chee vee'no
                     |   sengustiĝis_          |   sehn-goost-ee'jees
  What do I owe?     | _Kiom mi ŝuldas?_       | kee'ohm mee
                     |                         |   shool'dahss?
  What is the        | _Kiom estas?_           | kee'ohm eh'stahss?
    charge?          |                         |


50. Tea. (_Teo._)

(For Vocabularies see §§. 4-6 & 14-15.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Will you come to   | _Ĉu vi venos por trinki | choo vee veh'nohss pohr
    tea?             |   teon?_                |   trin'kee teh'ohn?
  Tea is ready       | _La teo estas preta_    | la teh'oh ehstahss
                     |                         |   prehtah
  Pour out the tea   | _Verŝu la teon_         | vehr'shoo la teh'ohn
  Ring, if you       | _Sonorigu, mi petas_    | so-noree'goo, mee
    please           |                         |   peh'tahss
  A little more milk | _Iom plu da lakto_      | ee'ohm ploo dah
                     |                         |   lahk'toh
  Some more bread    | _Iom plu da pano kaj    | ee'ohm ploo dah pah'no
    and butter       |   butero_               |   kahy bootehr'oh
  Do you like your   | _Ĉu vi ŝatas vian teon  | choo vee shah'tahss
    tea strong?      |   forta?_               |   vee'ahn teh'ohn
                     |                         |   fort'ah?
  Not too strong     | _Ne tro forta_          | neh tro fort'ah
  I like it rather   | _Mi ŝatas ĝin iom       | mee shah'tahss jeen
    strong           |   forta_                |   ee'ohm fort'ah
  Bring a saucer     | _Alportu subtason_      | ahlport'oo soobtah'sohn
  Do you take cream? | _Ĉu vi prenas kremon?_  | choo vee preh'nahss
                     |                         |   kreh'mohn?
  This cream is sour | _Tiu ĉi kremo estas     | tee'oo chee kreh'mo
                     |   malfreŝa_             |   eh'stahss
                     |                         |   mahlfreh'shah
  Another cup of     | _Ankoraŭ tason da teo?_ | ahnkoh'rahw tah'sohn
    tea?             |                         |   dah teh'oh?
  Is your tea sweet  | _Ĉu via teo estas       | choo vee'ah teh'oh
    enough?          |   sufiĉe sukerita?_     |   eh'stahss soofee'cheh
                     |                         |   soo-kehree'tah?
  I should like a    | _Mi preferas iom malpli | mee prefehr'ahss ee'ohm
    little less milk |   da lakto_             |   mahl'pli dah lahk'toh


51. Health. (_La Sano._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 13.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  How are you?       | _Kiel vi fartas?_       | kee'ehl vee fahr'tahss?
  I am very well     | _Mi tre bone fartas_    | mee treh bo'neh
                     |                         |   fahr'tahss
  I am ill           | _Mi estas malsana_      | mee eh'stahss
                     |                         |   mahlsah'nah
  I am not very well | _Mi ne tre bone fartas_ | mee neh treh bo'neh
                     |                         |   fahr'tahss
  Are you quite      | _Ĉu vi bone fartas?_    | choo vee bo'neh
    well?            |                         |   fahr'tahss?
  Quite well, thank  | _Tute bone, mi dankas_  | too'teh bo'neh, mee
    you              |                         |   dahn-kahss
  Pretty well,       | _Sufiĉe bone, dankon_   | soofee'cheh bo'neh,
    thanks           |                         |   dahn-kohn
  How do you feel?   | _Kiel vi vin sentas?_   | kee'ehl vee vin
                     |                         |   sehn'tahss?
  I don't feel well  | _Mi ne sentas min en    | mee neh sehntahss min
                     |   tre bona stato_       |   ehn treh bo'nah
                     |                         |   stahtoh
  I feel better      | _Mi sentas min en pli   | mee sehn'tahss min ehn
                     |   bona stato_           |   plee bo'nah stahtoh
  I hope you will    | _Mi esperas ke vi       | mee espeh'rahss, keh
    soon be better   |   baldaŭ resaniĝos_     |   vee bahl'dahw
                     |                         |   rehsahnee'johss
  Do you sleep well? | _Ĉu vi bone dormas?_    | choo vee bo'neh
                     |                         |   dohr-mahss?
  I have caught a    | _Mi malvarmumis_        | mee mahlvahrmoo'meess
    chill            |                         |
  I have a headache  | _Mi havas kapdoloron_   | mee ha'vahss
                     |                         |   kahp-dolohr'ohn
  I feel sick        | _Mi sentas naŭzon_      | mee sehn-tahss
                     |                         |   nahw'zohn
  Send for the       | _Venigu la kuraciston_  | vehnee'goo lah
    doctor           |                         |   kooraht-sees'tohn
  She has a bad      | _Ŝi havas malbonan      | shee ha'vahss
    cough            |   tuson_                |   mahlbo'nahn too'sohn
  How much is the    | _Kiom estas la          | kee'ohm eh'stahss lah
    doctor's fee for |   honorario de l'       |   honoh-rahree'oh dehl
    a visit?         |   kuracisto por         |   kooraht-see'stoh pohr
                     |   vizito?_              |   veezee'toh?
  Where is there a   | _Kie estas apoteko?_    | kee'eh eh'stahss
    chemist's?       |                         |   ahpoh-teh'ko?
  Have this          | _Plenumigu tiun ĉi      | plehnoomee'goo tee'oon
    prescription     |   recepton_             |   chee rehtsehp'tohn
    made up          |                         |
  One tablespoonful  | _Unu granda plenkulero  | oonoo grahndah
    three times a    |   tri fojojn ĉiutage_   |   plehn'kooleh'roh tree
    day              |                         |   foh'yoyn
                     |                         |   chee'oo-tah'gheh
  To be taken after  | _Prenota post ĉiu       | prehno'tah post chee'oo
    each meal        |   manĝo_                |   mahn'jo
  Shake the bottle   | _Skuu la botelon_       | skoo'oo lah boteh'lohn
  For outward        | _Nur por ekstera        | noor pohr eksteh'rah
    application only |   aplikado_             |   ahpleekah'doh
  Poison             | _Veneno_                | vehneh'no


52. In Town. (_En la Urbo._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 9.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Where shall we go? | _Kien ni iru?_          | kee'ehn nee ee'roo?
  Which is the way   | _Kiu estas la vojo      | kee'oo eh'stahss la
    to...?           |   al...?_               |   vo'yo ahl...?
  To the right--left | _Dekstren--maldekstren_ | dehkstrehn--
                     |                         |   mahldehk'strehn
  Straight before    | _Rekte antaŭen_         | rek'teh ahntah'wehn
    you              |                         |
  Is it far from     | _Ĉu malproksime de tie  | choo mahl-proksee'meh
    here?            |   ĉi?_                  |   deh tee-eh chee?
  About a mile       | _Proksimume unu mejlon_ | proksee-moo'meh oonoo
                     |                         |   may'lohn
  Go up the street   | _Supreniru la straton_  | soo'prehn-eer'oo lah
                     |                         |   strah'tohn
  Where does this    | _Kien kondukas tiu ĉi   | kee'ehn kondoo'kahss
    road lead to?    |   vojo?_                |   tee'oo chee vo'yo?
  How far is it      | _Kiom da vojo estas     | kee'ohm dah vo'yo
    to...?           |   ĝis...?_              |   eh'stahss jeess...?
  Show me the way    | _Montru al mi la vojon_ | mohn'troo ahl mee la
                     |                         |   vo'yohn
  Straight on        | _Rekte antaŭen_         | rek'teh ahntah'wehn
  Turn to the right  | _Turnu dekstren_        | toor'noo dehk'strehn
  Second turning to  | _La dua vojo dekstren_  | la doo'ah vo'yo
    the right        |                         |   dehk'strehn
  Keep to the left   | _Iradu maldekstren_     | eerah'doo
                     |                         |   mahl-dehk'strehn
  Take the third on  | _Sekvu la trian         | sehk'voo la tree'ahn
    the left         |   maldekstren_          |   mahl-dehk'strehn
  At the top of this | _Ĉe la fino de tiu ĉi   | cheh la fee'no deh
    street           |   strato_               |   tee'oo chee strah'toh
  Cross the road     | _Transiru la vojon_     | trahnseer'oo la vo'yohn
  Let us go!         | _Ni iru!_               | nee eer'oo!
  In what street     | _En kiu strato          | ehn kee'oo strah'toh
    is...?           |   estas...?_            |   eh'stahss...?
  Is this the way    | _Ĉu tiu estas la vojo   | choo tee'oo eh'stahss
    to...?           |   al...?_               |   la vo'yo ahl...?
  Do you know Mr.    | _Ĉu vi konas Sinjoron   | choo vee ko'nahss
    F.?              |   F.?_                  |   seenyohr'ohn F.?
  I don't know       | _Mi ne konas iun tiel   | mee neh ko'nahss
    anyone of that   |   nomitan_              |   ee'oon, tee'ehl
    name             |                         |   no-mee'tahn
  I know him very    | _Mi tre bone konas lin_ | mee treh boneh ko'nahss
    well             |                         |   leen
  He is a friend of  | _Li estas unu el miaj   | lee eh'stahss oo'noo
    mine             |   amikoj_               |   ehl mee'ahy ahmee'koy
  Where does he      | _Kie li loĝas?_         | kee'eh lee lo'jahss?
    live?            |                         |
  Can you direct me  | _Ĉu vi povas direkti    | choo vee po'vahss
    to his house?    |   min al lia domo?_     |   deerek'tee meen ahl
                     |                         |   lee'ah do'mo?
  Can I see Mr. F.?  | _Ĉu mi povas vidi       | choo mee po'vahss
                     |   Sinjoron F.?_         |   veedee seenyohr'ohn
                     |                         |   F.?
  He is out just now | _Nunmomente li ne estas | noon-mo-mehn'teh lee
                     |   hejme_                |   neh ehstahss hehy'meh
  Is Mrs. F. at      | _Ĉu Sinjorino F. estas  | choo seenyo-ree'no F.
    home?            |   hejme?_               |   eh'stahss hehy'meh?
  Mrs. F. is not at  | _S-no F. ne estas       | seenyo-ree'no F. neh
    home             |   hejme_                |   es'tahss hehy'meh
  I will call again  | _Mi revenos_            | mee rehveh'nohss
  I expect him every | _Mi atendas lian venon  | mee ahtehn'dahss
    moment           |   ĉiumomente_           |   lee-ahn veh'nohn
                     |                         |   chee'oo-mo-mehn'teh
  Have you your      | _Ĉu vi havas            | choo vee ha'vahss
    card?            |   vizitkarton?_         |   vee-zeet-kahr'tohn?
  Does he expect     | _Ĉu li atendas vin?_    | choo lee ahtehn'dahss
    you?             |                         |   veen?
  He is expecting me | _Li atendas mian venon_ | lee ahtehn'dahss
                     |                         |   mee'ahn veh'nohn
  I have an          | _Mi havas rendevuon kun | mee ha'vahss
    appointment with |   li_                   |   rehndeh-voo'ohn koon
    him              |                         |   lee
  I am engaged       | _Mi estas okupata kun   | mee eh'stahss
                     |   iu_                   |   ohkoopah'tah koon
                     |                         |   ee'oo
  Good morning!      | _Bonan matenon!_        | bo'nahn ma-teh'nohn!
  Good day!          | _Bonan tagon!_          | bo'nahn tah'gohn!
  How do you do?     | _Kiel vi fartas?_       | kee'ehl vee fahr'tahss?
  How is Mrs. F.?    | _Kiel fartas S-no F.?_  | kee'ehl fahr'tahss
                     |                         |   seen-yo-ree'no F.?
  Give my            | _Prezentu miajn         | prehzehn'too mee'ahyn
    compliments to   |   komplimentojn al      |   komplee-mehn'toyn ahl
    Miss F.          |   Fraŭlino F._          |   frahw-lee'no F.
  So pleased to see  | _Tre kontenta vidi vin_ | treh kontehn'tah
    you              |                         |   vee'dee vin
  Good-bye!          | _Adiaŭ!_                | ahdee'ahw!
  Farewell!          | _Ĝis revido!_           | jeess rehvee'doh!
  Must you go yet?   | _Ĉu vi devas jam        | choo vee deh'vahss yahm
                     |   foriri?_              |   foreer'ee?
  I must go          | _Mi devas foriri_       | mee deh'vahss foreer'ee
  Good evening!      | _Bonan vesperon!_       | bo'nahn vespehr'ohn!
  Good night!        | _Bonan nokton!_         | bo'nahn nok'tohn!


53. Shopping. (_Aĉetado._)

(For Vocabularies see §§. 3-8 & 14-18.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  I wish to buy      | _Mi volas aĉeti_        | mee vo'lahss
                     |                         |   ah-cheh'tee
  Do you keep...?    | _Ĉu vi havas...?_       | choo vee ha'vahss...?
  We have none in    | _Ni ne havas en         | nee neh ha'vahss ehn
    stock            |   magazeno_             |   ma-gahzeh'no
  We can get you     | _Ni povas iom por vi    | nee po'vahss ee'ohm
    some             |   akiri_                |   pohr vee ahkeer'ee
  What price would   | _Je kioma prezo vi ĝin  | yeh kee-oh'ma preh'zo
    you like?        |   deziras?_             |   vee jeen
                     |                         |   dehzeer'ahss?
  About half-a-crown | _Po ĉirkaŭ duonkrono    | po cheer'kahw
    a yard           |   par jardo_            |   doo-ohn-kro'no pohr
                     |                         |   yahrdoh
  May we get it for  | _Ĉu ni ĝin por vi       | choo nee jeen pohr vee
    you?             |   akiru?_               |   ahkeer'oo?
  What is the price? | _Kiom estas la prezo?_  | kee'ohm eh'stahss lah
                     |                         |   preh'zo?
  How much?          | _Kiom?_                 | kee'ohm?
  That is too much   | _Tio estas tro kara_    | tee'oh eh'stahss tro
                     |                         |   kah'rah
  Have you a         | _Ĉu vi havas alian      | choo vee ha'vahss
    different        |   specon?_              |   ah-lee'ahn
    pattern?         |                         |   speht'sohn?
  -- a better        | -- _pli bonan ŝtofon?_  | -- plee bo'nahn
    material?        |                         |   shto'fohn?
  Can you recommend  | _Ĉu vi povas ĝin        | choo vee po'vahss jeen
    it?              |   rekomendi?_           |   rehkomehn'dee?
  We can recommend   | _Ni povas rekomendi     | nee po'vahss
    this             |   tion_                 |   rehkomehn'dee tee'ohn
  We guarantee this  | _Ni tiun ĉi kvaliton    | nee tee'oon chee
    quality          |   garantias_            |   kvah-lee'tohn
                     |                         |   gahrahn-tee'ahss
  I should like to   | _Mi dezirus vidi        | mee dehzeerooss veedee
    see some ribbons |   rubandojn_            |   roobahn'doyn
  I want some calico | _Mi deziras iom da      | mee dehzeer'ahss ee'ohm
                     |   kalikoto_             |   dah kahlee-ko'toh
  This colour is too | _Tiu ĉi koloro estas    | tee'oo chee ko-lohr'oh
    dark             |   tro malpala_          |   ehstahss tro
                     |                         |   mahlpah'lah
  It is faded        | _La koloro iom          | la ko-lohr'oh ee'ohm
                     |   malaperis_            |   mahl-ahpehr'eess
  Have you any       | _Ĉu vi havas pli        | choo vee ha'vahss plee
    narrower?        |   mallarĝan?_           |   mahl-lahr'jahn?
  What is this a     | _Kiom tio kostas por    | kee'ohm tee'o kost'ahss
    yard?            |   unu jardo?_           |   pohr oo'noo yahr'doh?
  This will do       | _Tio ĉi taŭgos_         | tee'oh chee tahw'gohss
  I will take this   | _Mi tion prenos_        | mee tee'ohn preh'nohss
  A reel of cotton   | _Unu bobeno da kotono_  | oonoo bo-beh'no dah
                     |                         |   ko-toh'no
  A skein            | _Fadenaro_              | fahdeh-nah'ro
  A packet of mixed  | _Paketo da miksitaj     | pahkeh'toh dah
    pins             |   pingloj_              |   miksee'tahy peen'gloy
  Not so fine        | _Ne tiel delikata_      | neh tee'ehl
                     |                         |   dehleekah'tah
  Show me some       | _Montru al mi gantojn_  | mohntroo ahl mee
    gloves           |                         |   gahn'toyn
  Try on these       | _Prove surmetu ĉi       | pro'veh soormeh'too
                     |   tiujn_                |   chee tee'ooyn
  What are they a    | _Kiom kostas unu paro?_ | kee'ohm ko'stahss
    pair?            |                         |   oo'noo pah'ro?
  That is too dear   | _Tio estas tro kara_    | tee'oh eh'stahss tro
                     |                         |   kah-rah
  They fit you very  | _Ili tre bone taŭgas_   | ee'lee treh bo'neh
    well             |                         |   tah'w-gahss
  I will take them   | _Mi kunprenos ĉion_     | mee koon-preh'nohss
    with me          |                         |   chee'ohn
  Please give me my  | _Volu doni mian         | vo'loo doh'nee mee'ahn
    bill             |   kalkulon_             |   kahl-koo'lohn
  Send all this home | _Sendu ĉion ĉi hejmen   | sehn'doo chee'ohn chee
    at once          |   tuj_                  |   hehy'mehn tooy
  Can I send them    | _Ĉu mi povas sendi ilin | choo mee po'vahss
    for you?         |   por vi?_              |   sehn'dee ee'leen pohr
                     |                         |   vee?
  Send them to...    | _Sendu ilin al..._      | sehn'doo ee'leen ahl...
  Will you send them | _Ĉu vi tuj sendos       | choo vee tooy sehndohss
    at once?         |   ilin?_                |   ee'leen?
  What name, please? | _Kiu nomo, mi petas?_   | kee'oo no'mo, mee
                     |                         |   peh'tahss?
  To what address?   | _Al kiu adreso?_        | ahl kee'oo ahdreh'so?


54. The Dressmaker. (_La Modistino._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 16.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Here is the        | _Jen estas la           | yehn eh'stahss lah
    dressmaker       |   modistino_            |   mo-distee'no
  Ask her to wait    | _Petu, ke ŝi atendu_    | peh'too, keh shee
                     |                         |   ah-tehn'doo
  Show her in        | _Enirigu ŝin_           | ehneeree'goo sheen
  Have you brought   | _Ĉu vi alportis mian    | choo vee ahlpohr'teess
    my dress?        |   robon?_               |   mee'ahn ro'bohn?
  Here it is, madam  | _Jen, sinjorino_        | yehn, seenyoh-ree'no
  Will you try it    | _Ĉu vi prove surmetos   | choo vee pro'veh
    on?              |   ĝin?_                 |   soor-meh'tohss jeen?
  It fits you very   | _Ĝi tre ĝuste taŭgas al | jee treh joo'steh
    well             |   vi_                   |   tah'w-gahss ahl vee
  It is not a good   | _Ĝi ne ĝuste taŭgas_    | jee neh joo'steh
    fit              |                         |   tah'w-gahss
  The skirt is too   | _La jupo estas tro      | lah yoo'po eh'stahss
    narrow           |   mallarĝa_             |   tro mahl-lahr'jah
  It is too          | _La talio estas tro     | lah tahlee'oh eh'stahss
    short-waisted    |   mallonga_             |   tro mahl-lohn'gah
  The sleeves are    | _La manikoj ne estas    | lah mahnee'koy neh
    not wide enough  |   sufiĉe larĝaj_        |   eh'stahss soofee'cheh
                     |                         |   lahr'jahy
  Make all these     | _Faru ĉiujn ĉi ŝanĝojn_ | fah'roo chee'ooyn chee
    alterations      |                         |   shahn'joyn
  What trimming      | _Per kio vi ĝin         | pehr kee'oh vee jeen
    would you put    |   garnus?_              |   gahr'nooss?
    on?              |                         |
  Pale pink ribbon   | _Pala rozkolora         | pah'lah rohz-ko-loh'rah
                     |   rubando_              |   roobahn'doh
  When can you let   | _Kiam vi povos doni ĝin | kee'ahm vee po'vohss
    me have it?      |   al mi?_               |   doh'nee jeen ahl mee?
  You shall have it  | _Vi havas ĝin sabaton_  | vee ha'vohss jeen
    on Saturday      |                         |   sah-bah'tohn
  Without fail       | _Nepre_                 | neh'preh
  Don't disappoint   | _Ne trompu miajn        | neh trohmpoo mee'ahyn
    me               |   esperojn_             |   espehr'oyn


55. The Shoemaker. (_La Ŝuisto._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  I wish to see some | _Mi deziras vidi botojn | mee dehzeer'ahss
    ladies' boots    |   por sinjorinoj_       |   vee'dee bo-toyn pohr
                     |                         |   seen-yoh-ree'noy
  Take my measure    | _Prenu mian mezuron_    | preh-noo mee-ahn
                     |                         |   meh-zoor'ohn
  The soles are      | _La plandumoj estas iom | la plahndoo'moy
    rather thick     |   dikaj_                |   eh'stahss ee-ohm
                     |                         |   dee'kahy
  They are too tight | _Ili tro premas_        | ee-lee tro preh-mahss
  I cannot get my    | _Mi ne povas enigi la   | mee neh po-vahss
    foot in          |   piedon_               |   ehnee'ghee la
                     |                         |   pee-eh'dohn
  Here is a          | _Jen estas ŝukorno_     | yehn eh-stahss
    shoe-horn        |                         |   shookohr'no
  Are they           | _Ĉu ili ĝenas?_         | choo ee-lee jeh-nahss?
    comfortable?     |                         |
  I cannot walk in   | _Mi ne povas iri en     | mee neh po-vahss eer-ee
    them             |   ili_                  |   ehn ee-lee
  They hurt my heel  | _Ili dolorigas mian     | ee-lee doh-loree'gahss
                     |   kalkanon_             |   meeahn kahlkah'nohn
  I must have them   | _Estas necese, ke mi    | eh-stahss nehtsah'seh,
    as soon as       |   ilin havu kiel eble   |   keh mee ee-leen
    possible         |   plej baldaŭ_          |   ha-voo kee-ehl
                     |                         |   eh-bleh plehy'
                     |                         |   bahl-dahw
  I want some        | _Mi bezonas laĉojn_     | mee behzoh'nahss
    bootlaces        |                         |   lah'choyn
  How much are they  | _Kiom kostas unu paro?_ | kee-ohm ko-stahss
    a pair?          |                         |   oo-noo pah-ro?
  I want these shoes | _Mi deziras lasi        | mee dehzeer'ahss lahsee
    soled and heeled |   plandumi kaj          |   plahndoo'mee kahy
                     |   kalkanumi tiujn ĉi    |   kahlkahnoo'mee
                     |   ŝuojn_                |   tee-ooyn chee
                     |                         |   shoo-oyn
  Send my boots to   | _Sendu ripariĝi miajn   | sehn-doo ripahree'jee
    be mended        |   botojn_               |   mee'ahyn bo-toyn
  When will they be  | _Kiam ili estos         | kee-ahm ee-lee ehstohss
    done?            |   pretaj?_              |   preh' tahy?


56. The Laundress. (_La Lavistino._)

(For Washing List see §. 17.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  I want this linen  | _Mi volas lavigi ĉi     | mee vo-lahss
    washed           |   tiun tolaĵon_         |   lahvee'ghee chee
                     |                         |   tee-oon toh-lah'zhohn
  I miss a collar    | _Mankas unu kolumon_    | mahn-kahss oo-noo
                     |                         |   ko-loo'mohn
  You don't put      | _Vi ne enmetas sufiĉe   | vee neh ehnmeh'tahss
    enough starch in |   da amelo_             |   soofee'cheh dah
                     |                         |   ah-meh'lo
  This is too limp   | _Tio ĉi estas tro mola_ | tee-oh chee ehstahss
                     |                         |   tro mo-lah
  See how badly that | _Vidu, kiel malbone tio | vee-doo, kee-ehl
    is done          |   estas farita_         |   mahl-bo'neh tee-oh
                     |                         |   ehstahss fahree'tah
  You must take it   | _Vi devas reporti ĝin_  | vee deh-vahss
    back             |                         |   rehpohr'tee jeen
  This is badly      | _Tio ĉi estas malbone   | tee-oh chee eh-stahss
    ironed           |   gladita_              |   mahlbo'neh
                     |                         |   glahdee'tah
  You have scorched  | _Vi iom brulbrunigis    | vee ee-ohm
    this dress       |   tiun ĉi robon_        |   brool'broo-
                     |                         |   nee'gheess tee'oon
                     |                         |   chee ro-bohn
  You put too much   | _Vi metas tro da bluo   | vee meh-tahss tro dah
    blue in my linen |   en mian tolaĵon_      |   bloo-oh ehn mee-ahn
                     |                         |   tohlah'zhohn
  This is not my     | _Tio ĉi ne estas mia    | tee-oh chee neh
    handkerchief     |   naztuko_              |   eh'stahss mee-ah
                     |                         |   nahz-too'ko
  You have torn the  | _Vi ŝiris la punton_    | vee sheer-eess la
    lace             |                         |   poon-tohn
  When can I have    | _Kiam mi povos havi     | kee-ahm mee po-vohss
    it?              |   ĝin?_                 |   hah-vee jeen?
  Return this linen  | _Resendi tiun ĉi        | rehsehn'dee tee-oon
    on...            |   tolaĵon la..._        |   chee tohlah'zhohn
                     |                         |   la...
  You must bring     | _Estas necese, ke vi    | eh-stahss nehtseh'seh,
    back this list   |   reportu tiun ĉi       |   keh vee rehpohr'too
                     |   liston_               |   tee-oon chee
                     |                         |   lee-stohn
  Have you your      | _Ĉu vi havas vian       | choo vee ha-vahss
    bill?            |   kalkulon?_            |   veeahn kahlkoo'lohn?
  I will pay you     | _Mi pagos vin_          | mee pa-gohss veen


57. Amusements. (_Amuzaĵoj._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 22.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Shall we go to the | _Ĉu ni iru al la        | choo nee eer-oo ahl la
    theatre?         |   teatro?_              |   teh-ah'tro?
  What is on at      | _Kion oni ludas ĉe      | kee-ohn ohnee loo-dahss
    the...?          |   la...?_               |   cheh la...?
  When does the      | _Kiam komenciĝas la     | kee-ahm
    performance      |   prezentado?_          |   komehnt-see'jahss la
    begin?           |                         |   prezentah'doh?
  What time do the   | _Je kioma horo oni      | yeh kee-oh'mah ho-ro
    doors open?      |   malfermas la          |   ohnee mahlfehr'mahss
                     |   pordojn?_             |   la pohr-doyn?
  Is the box-office  | _Ĉu la lokoficejo estas | choo la
    open?            |   malfermita?_          |   loh'kofeetseh'yo
                     |                         |   eh-stahss
                     |                         |   mahlfehrmee'tah?
  Where can we book  | _Kie oni povas antaŭe   | kee-eh oh-nee po-vahss
    seats?           |   rezervi lokojn?_      |   ahntah'weh
                     |                         |   rehzehr'vee lo-koyn?
  I should like to   | _Mi dezirus vidi        | mee dehzeer'ooss veedee
    see a plan       |   planon_               |   plah-nohn
  Let us take a box  | _Ni prenu loĝion_       | nee preh-noo lohjee'ohn
  These seats are    | _Ĉi tiuj seĝoj estas    | chee tee'ooy seh-joy
    reserved         |   rezervitaj_           |   eh'stahss
                     |                         |   rehzehrvee'tahy
  We will take four  | _Ni prenos kvar lokojn_ | nee preh-nohss kvahr
    seats            |                         |   lo-koyn
  Where are our      | _Kie estas niaj lokoj?_ | kee-eh ehstahss nee'ahy
    seats?           |                         |   lo-koy?
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la           | kee-eh eh-stahss la
    cloakroom?       |   vestodeponejo?_       |   veh-sto-dehpohneh'yo?
  Give me a          | _Donu al mi programon_  | doh-noo ahl mee
    programme        |                         |   prohgrah'mohn
  What is the play?  | _Kion oni ludas?_       | kee-ohn ohnee
                     |                         |   loo-dahss?
  How well the band  | _Kiel bone la orkestro  | kee-ehl bo-neh la
    plays!           |   ludas!_               |   or-keh'stro
                     |                         |   loo-dahss!
  There is a fine    | _Estas bonega orkestro_ | ehstahss bo-neh'gah
    orchestra        |                         |   orkeh'stro
  What an excellent  | _Kiel bonega pianisto!_ | kee-ehl bo-neh'gah
    pianist!         |                         |   pee-ahnist'o!
  An interval of     | _Intertempo de dek-kvin | in'tehr-tehm'po deh
    fifteen minutes  |   minutoj_              |   dehk-kveen meenoo'toy
  Would you like     | _Ĉu vi deziras ion      | choo vee dehzeer'ahss
    some             |   manĝi aŭ trinki?_     |   ee-ohn mahn-jee ahw
    refreshment?     |                         |   trinkee?
  Shall we go to the | _Ĉu ni iru al la        | choo nee ee-roo ahl la
    buffet?          |   bufedo?_              |   boofeh'doh?
  Is there a good    | _Ĉu estas ĉi tie bona   | choo eh-stahss chee
    museum?          |   muzeo?_               |   tee-eh bo-nah
                     |                         |   moozeh'oh?
  The works of art   | _La artaĵoj estas tre   | la ahrtah'zhoy
    are very fine    |   belaj_                |   eh-stahss treh
                     |                         |   beh'lahy
  Are tickets        | _Ĉu oni devas havi      | choo oh-nee deh-vahss
    required?        |   biletojn?_            |   hah-vee beeleh'toyn?
  Who sells them?    | _Kiu vendas ilin?_      | kee-oo ven-dahss
                     |                         |   eeleen?
  The coach leaves   | _La diliĝenco ekveturas | la deelee-jehnt'so
    at ten           |   je la deka_           |   ehk-veh-toor'ahss yeh
                     |                         |   la deh-kah
  How much will it   | _Kiom ĝi kostos?_       | kee-ohm jee ko-stohss?
    cost?            |                         |
  It will take all   | _La veturo tien okupos  | la vehtoor'oh tee-ehn
    day to go there  |   la tutan tagon_       |   ohkoo'pohss la
                     |                         |   too-tahn tah-gohn
  Can you put us up  | _Ĉu vi povas kunmeti    | choo vee po-vahss
    some             |   por ni iom da         |   koon-meh'tee pohr nee
    refreshment?     |   nutraĵo?_             |   ee-ohm dah
                     |                         |   nootrah'zho?
  We should like     | _Ni deziras sandviĉojn_ | nee dehzeer'ahss
    some sandwiches  |                         |   sahnd-vee'choyn
  Is there a good    | _Ĉu estas bona loko,    | choo eh-stahss bo-nah
    place for lunch? |   kie oni povas         |   lo-ko, kee-eh ohnee
                     |   tagmanĝi?_            |   po-vahss
                     |                         |   tahg-mahn'jee?


58. Cycling. (_La Ciklismo._)

(For Vocabularies see §§. 23-24.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  I want to hire a   | _Mi deziras lui         | mee dehzeer'ahss loo-ee
    machine          |   biciklon_             |   beetsee'klohn.
  With all           | _Kun ĉiuj akcesoraĵoj_  | koon chee-ooy
    accessories      |                         |   ahktseh-so-rah'zhoy
  By the hour        | _Laŭhore_               | lahw-ho'reh
  By the day         | _Laŭtage_               | lahw-tah'gheh
  What are your      | _Kiom vi postulas?_     | kee-ohm vee
    terms?           |                         |   postoo'lahss?
  Have you a cycle   | _Ĉu vi havas remizon    | choo vee hah-vahss
    shelter?         |   por bicikloj?_        |   reh-mee'zohn pohr
                     |                         |   beet-see'kloy?
  Tighten this nut   | _Fiksu tiun ĉi          | fik-soo tee-oon chee
                     |   ŝraŭbingon_           |   shrahw-been'gohn
  Loosen the chain   | _Malstreĉu la ĉenon_    | mahl-streh'choo la
                     |                         |   cheh-nohn
  What are the roads | _Kiaj estas la vojoj?_  | kee-ahy eh-stahss la
    like?            |                         |   vo-yoy?
  Are the roads      | _Ĉu la vojoj estas      | choo la vo-yoy ehstahss
    good?            |   bonaj?_               |   bo'nahy?
  The roads are bad  | _La vojoj estas         | la voyoy ehstahss
                     |   malbonaj_             |   mahl-bo'nahy
  The roads are in   | _La vojoj estas en bona | la vo-yoy eh-stahss ehn
    good condition   |   stato_                |   bo-nah stah-toh
  We will start      | _Ni ekiros je la..._    | nee ekeer'ohss yeh
    at...            |                         |   la...
  Are you ready?     | _Ĉu vi estas preta?_    | choo vee eh-stahss
                     |                         |   preh-tah?
  Make haste!        | _Rapidu!_               | rahpee'doo!
  Turn to the right  | _Turnu dekstren_        | toor-noo dehk-strehn
  Keep straight on   | _Iru rekte antaŭen_     | ee-roo rehkteh
                     |                         |   ahntah'wehn
  This hill is       | _Ĉi tiu deklivo estas   | chee tee-oo dehklee'vo
    dangerous        |   danĝera_              |   eh-stahss
                     |                         |   dahn-jeh'rah
  Ring your bell     | _Tintigu vian tintilon_ | tintee'goo vee-ahn
                     |                         |   tin-tee'lohn
  Don't go so fast   | _Ne iru tiel rapide_    | neh ee-roo tee-ehl
                     |                         |   rah-pee'deh
  Look out! Stop!    | _Atentu! Haltu!_        | ahtehn'too! hahl-too!
  The chain is off   | _La ĉeno deiĝis_        | la cheh-no deh-ee'jeess
  I must pump up my  | _Estas necese, ke mi    | eh-stahss nehtseh'seh,
    tyres            |   ŝveligu la            |   keh mee shvehlee'goo
                     |   pneŭmatikojn_         |   la pnehw-mahtee'koyn
  My tyre is         | _Mia pneŭmatiko estas   | mee-ah pnehw-mahtee'ko
    punctured        |   trapikita_            |   eh-stahss
                     |                         |   trahpee-kee'tah
  The back tyre is   | _La malantaŭa           | la mahl-ahntah'wah
    burst            |   pneŭmatiko krevis_    |   pnehw-matee'ko
                     |                         |   kreh-veess
  I have broken a... | _Mi rompis..._          | mee rohmpeess...
  Where can I get my | _Kie mi povas riparigi  | kee-eh mee povahss
    bicycle mended?  |   mian biciklon?_       |   reepahree'ghee
                     |                         |   mee-ahn
                     |                         |   beetsee'klohn?
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la plej      | kee-eh eh-stahss la
    nearest cycle    |   proksima              |   plehy proksee'mah
    shop?            |   biciklobutiko?_       |   beetsee'klo-
                     |                         |   bootee'ko?
  Will you please    | _Ĉu vi afable           | choo vee ahfah'bleh
    repair...?       |   riparos...?_          |   ree-pahr'ohss...?
  When will it be    | _Kiam ĝi estos preta?_  | kee-ahm jee eh-stohss
    ready?           |                         |   prehtah?
  I want my machine  | _Mi deziras lasi purigi | mee dehzeer'ahss
    cleaned          |   mian maŝinon_         |   lah-see pooree'ghee
                     |                         |   mee-ahn mahshee'nohn
  How long will it   | _Kiom da tempo tio      | kee-ohm dah tehm'po
    take?            |   okupos?_              |   tee-oh ohkoo'pohss?
  Is it time to      | _Ĉu estas la horo por   | choo eh-stahss la ho-ro
    light up?        |   lumigo?_              |   pohr loomee'go?
  We must light up   | _Ni devas lumigi_       | nee deh-vahss
                     |                         |   loomee'ghee
  Lighting-up time   | _La lumiga horo estas   | la loomee'gah ho-ro
    is at eight      |   je la oka_            |   eh-stahss yeh la
    o'clock          |                         |   oh-kah
  Please fill my     | _Volu plenigi mian      | vo-loo plehnee'ghee
    lamp             |   lampon_               |   mee-ahn lahm-pohn
  It wants a new     | _Ĝi bezonas novan       | jee behzoh'nahss
    wick             |   meĉon_                |   no-vahn meh-chohn
  How much is it?    | _Kiom estas?_           | kee-ohm eh-stahss?
  Have you a road    | _Ĉu vi havas vojan      | choo vee hah-vahss
    guide?           |   gvidplanon?_          |   vo-yahn
                     |                         |   gveed-plah'nohn?
  Which do you       | _Kiun vi bezonas?_      | kee-oon vee
    require?         |                         |   behzoh'nahss?
  A map of the Paris | _Mapon de la Pariza     | mah-pohn deh la
    district         |   regiono_              |   pah-ree'zah
                     |                         |   reh-gheeoh'no


59. Motoring. (_Aŭtomobilismo._)

(For Vocabularies see §§. 23-24; see also Cycling Phrases, above.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Is there a motor   | _Ĉu estas remizo por    | choo eh-stahss
    garage in this   |   aŭtomobiloj en tiu ĉi |   rehmee'zo pohr
    town?            |   urbo?_                |   ahwtohmoh-bee'loy ehn
                     |                         |   tee-oo chee oor-bo?
  Give me some       | _Donu al mi petrolon_   | doh-noo ahl mee
    petrol           |                         |   peh-tro'lohn
  I want a           | _Mi deziras             | mee dehzeer'ahss
    carburator for   |   karburatoron por      |   kahr-boo-rahtohr'ohn
    motor-car        |   aŭtomobilo_           |   pohr
                     |                         |   ahw-toh-mohbee'lo
  The clutch is out  | _La konektumo ne        | la kohnehktoo'mo neh
    of order         |   funkcias_             |   foonk-tsee'ahss
  Have you examined  | _Ĉu vi ekzamenis la     | choo vee
    my               |   rapidŝanĝan           |   ehkzahmeh'neess la
    speed-changing   |   mekanismon?_          |   rah-peed'shahn'jahn
    gear?            |                         |   mehkah-nees'mohn?
  Replace my brake   | _Remetu mian bremson_   | rehmeh'too mee-ahn
                     |                         |   brehm-sohn
  My back spring is  | _Mia malantaŭa risorto  | mee-ah mahl-ahntah'wah
    broken           |   estas rompita_        |   ree-sohr'toh ehstahss
                     |                         |   rohmpee'tah
  Have you an        | _Ĉu vi havas            | choo vee hah-vahss
    accumulator--    |   akumulatoron--de kvar |   ah-koomoo-
    four volts?      |   voltoj?_              |   lahtohr'ohn--deh
                     |                         |   kvahr vohl-toy?
  What is the power  | _Kioma estas la potenco | keeoh'ma eh-stahss la
    of this motor?   |   de tiu ĉi             |   po-tehnt'so deh
                     |   aŭtomobilo?_          |   tee-oo chee
                     |                         |   ahwtohmohbee'lo?
  This is an         | _Tiu ĉi estas maŝino de | tee-oo chee eh-stahss
    eight-horse-     |   okĉevala potenco_     |   mahshee'no deh
    power engine     |                         |   ohk'chehvah'lah
                     |                         |   potehnt'so
  A pinion is wanted | _Mankas dentradeto ĉe   | mahn-kahss
    for the small    |   la malgranda akso_    |   dehnt'rah-deh'toh
    axle             |                         |   cheh la
                     |                         |   mahl-grahn'dah ahk'so
  I want my          | _Mi deziras ŝargigi     | mee dehzeer'ahss
    accumulator      |   mian akumulatoron_    |   shar-ghee'ghee
    charged          |                         |   mee-ahn
                     |                         |   ah-koomoolahtohr'ohn
  I have lost my     | _Mi perdis mian kornon_ | mee pehrdeess mee-ahn
    horn (_or_       |   (or _blekilon_)       |   kohr'nohn
    hooter)          |                         |   (blehkee'lohn)
  Are you an         | _Ĉu vi estas sperta     | choo vee eh-stahss
    experienced      |   motorveturigisto?_    |   spehr-tah
    driver?          |                         |   motohr'veh-tooree-
                     |                         |   gheess'toh?
  What experience    | _Kiun spertadon vi      | kee'oon spehrtah'dohn
    have you had?    |   havis?_               |   vee hah'veess?
  Drive slowly       | _Veturu malrapide tra   | vehtoor'oo
    through the town |   la urbo_              |   mahlrahpee'deh trah
                     |                         |   la oor-bo
  Speed not to       | _La rapideco devas ne   | la rahpeedeht'so
    exceed...miles   |   esti pli ol...mejloj  |   deh-vahss neh eh-stee
    per hour         |   ĉiuhore_              |   plee ohl...meh'y-loy
                     |                         |   chee-oo-ho'reh


60. Photography. (_La Fotografarto._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 25.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Must permission be | _Ĉu oni devas havi      | choo oh-nee deh-vahss
    obtained to      |   permeson por          |   hah-vee pehrmeh'sohn
    photograph?      |   fotografi?_           |   pohr fo-tograh'fee?
  I wish to take the | _Mi volas fotografi la  | mee vo-lahss
    interior         |   internon_             |   fo-tograh'fee la
                     |                         |   intehr'nohn
  Have you brought   | _Ĉu vi kunportis vian   | choo vee koonpor'teess
    your camera?     |   kamereton?_           |   veeahn
                     |                         |   kam-ehreh'tohn?
  This is my camera  | _Tio ĉi estas mia       | tee-oh chee eh-stahss
                     |   kamereto_             |   mee-ah kam-ehreh'toh
  The lens is broken | _La lenso estas         | la lehn-so eh-stahss
                     |   rompita_              |   rohmpee'tah
  The light is too   | _La lumo estas tro      | la loo-mo eh-stahss tro
    strong           |   forta_                |   fohr-tah
  What exposure must | _Kiom mi devas espozi   | kee-ohm mee deh-vahss
    I give it?       |   ĝin?_                 |   ehspo'zee jeen?
  It is out of focus | _Ĝi ne estas ĝuste en   | jee neh ehstahss
                     |   fokuso_               |   joo'steh ehn
                     |                         |   fo-koo'so
  What size of plate | _Kioman grandon de      | keeoh'mahn grahndohn
    do you use?      |   plato vi uzas?_       |   deh plah-toh vee
                     |                         |   oo-zahss?
  Have you a dark    | _Ĉu vi havas            | choo vee hah'vahss
    room?            |   rivelejon?_           |   ree-vehleh'yohn?
  I want to develop  | _Mi volas riveli        | mee vo-lahss reeveh'lee
    some plates      |   kelkajn platojn_      |   kehl'kahyn plah-toyn
  This plate is      | _Tiu ĉi plato estas     | tee-oo chee plah-toh
    spoilt           |   difektita_            |   eh-stahss
                     |                         |   deefehk-tee'tah
  That is due to     | _Tio estas pro troa     | tee-oh eh-stahss pro
    over-exposure    |   espozo_               |   tro-ah ehspo'zo
  I am going to      | _Mi presos plu da       | mee preh'sohss ploo da
    print more       |   ekzempleroj_          |   ehkzehm-pleh'roy
    copies           |                         |
  This was spoilt in | _Tiu ĉi difektiĝis dum  | tee-oo chee
    the printing     |   la presado_           |   deefehktee'jeess doom
                     |                         |   la prehsah'doh
  What a beautiful   | _Kiel bela              | kee-ehl beh-la
    photograph!      |   fotografaĵo!_         |   fo-to-grahfah'zho!
  The grouping is    | _La gruparanĝo estas    | la groop-ahrahn'jo
    very good        |   tre bona_             |   eh-stahss treh bo-nah
  I have secured     | _Mi kaptis bonegajn     | mee kahp-teess
    some fine views  |   vidaĵojn_             |   bo-neh'gahyn
                     |                         |   veedah'zhoyn
  Do you sell        | _Ĉu vi vendas           | choo vee vehn-dahss
    photographic     |   fotografajn           |   fo-tograh'fahyn
    materials?       |   materialojn?_         |   mahteh-reeah'loyn?
  I want some pretty | _Mi deziras beletajn    | mee dehzeer'ahss
    mounts           |   muntokartojn_         |   beh-leh'tahyn
                     |                         |   moontoh-kahr'toyn
  What do you        | _Kion vi bezonas?_      | kee-ohn vee
    require?         |                         |   behzohn'ahss?
  I should like some | _Mi bezonas plu da      | mee behzoh'nahss ploo
    more films       |   filmoj_               |   dah feel-moy


61. Religion. (_La Religio._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 26.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Is there an        | _Ĉu estas ĉi tie Angla  | choo eh-stahss chee
    English church   |   preĝejo?_             |   tee-eh ahnglah
    here?            |                         |   prehjeh'yo?
  Is it near here?   | _Ĉu ĝi estas proksima   | choo jee ehstahss
                     |   de tie ĉi?_           |   prohksee'ma deh
                     |                         |   tee-eh chee?
  Who is the         | _Kiu estas la           | kee-oo eh-stahss la
    preacher?        |   predikanto?_          |   prehdee-kahn'toh?
  What time is the   | _Je kioma horo          | yeh keeoh'ma horo
    service?         |   komenciĝas la         |   kohmentsee'jahss la
                     |   diservo?_             |   deesehr'vo?
  The seats must be  | _Oni devas pagi pri la  | oh-nee deh-vahss
    paid for         |   sidlokoj_             |   pahghee pree la
                     |                         |   seed-lo'koy
  The seats are free | _La sidlokoj estas      | la seed-lo'koy
                     |   senpagaj_             |   eh-stahss
                     |                         |   sehnpah'gahy
  Is there a         | _Ĉu estas monkolekto?_  | choo ehstahss
    collection?      |                         |   mohnko-lek'toh?
  An offertory is    | _Oni faras monkolekton_ | ohnee fahrahss
    taken            |                         |   mohnko-lek'tohn
  Can you find me a  | _Ĉu vi povas trovi por  | choo vee povahss trovee
    seat?            |   mi sidejon?_          |   pohr mee sid-eh'yohn?
  The verger will    | _La pedelo trovos       | la pehdeh'lo tro-vohss
    find you a seat  |   sidejon por vi_       |   sid-eh'yohn pohr vee
  Mass is being      | _Oni faras la meson_    | oh-nee fah-rahss la
    celebrated       |                         |   meh-sohn
  Let us wait--go    | _Ni atendu--ni iru_     | nee ahtehn'doo--nee
                     |                         |   eer'oo
  Pass me a          | _Volu transdoni         | vo-loo trahnsdoh'nee
    hymn-book        |   himnolibron_          |   him'no-lee'brohn
  What other         | _Kiuj aliaj diservoj    | kee-ooy ahlee'ahy
    services are     |   estas?_               |   deesehr'voy
    there?           |                         |   eh-stahss?


62. The Time of Day. (_La Horo._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  What time is it?   | _Kioma horo estas?_     | kee-oh'ma ho-ro
                     |                         |   ehstahss?
  It has just struck | _Ĵus sonis la naŭa      | zhooss so-neess la
    nine             |   (horo)_               |   nahwah (ho-ro)
  Exactly 3 o'clock  | _Precize la tria_       | prehtsee'zeh la tree-ah
  Ten (minutes) past | _Dek minutoj post la    | dehk meenoo'toy post la
    seven            |   sepa_                 |   seh-pa
  A quarter past one | _Kvarono post la unua_  | kvahro'no post la
                     |                         |   oonoo'ah
  Half-past four     | _Duono post la kvara_   | doo-o'no post la kvahra
  Twenty (minutes)   | _Dudek minutoj antaŭ la | doo-dehk meenoo'toy
    to six           |   sesa_                 |   ahn'tahw la seh-sah
  At what time?      | _Je kioma horo?_        | yeh kee-oh'ma ho-ro?
  At a quarter to    | _Je kvarono antaŭ la    | yeh kvahro'no ahn'tahw
    eight            |   oka_                  |   la oh-kah
  At nine a.m.       | _Je la naŭa matene_     | yeh la nah-wah
                     |                         |   mahteh'neh
  Seven-fifteen p.m. | _La sepa-dek-kvin       | la seh'pa-dehk-kveen
                     |   vespere_              |   veh-speh'reh
  Is it late?        | _Ĉu estas malfrue?_     | choo eh-stahss
                     |                         |   mahlfroo'eh?
  It is (not) late   | _(Ne) estas malfrue_    | (neh) eh-stahss
                     |                         |   mahlfroo'eh
  It is still early  | _Estas ankoraŭ frue_    | eh-stahss ahnko'rahw
                     |                         |   froo'eh
  It is getting late | _Malfruiĝas_            | mahl-froo-ee'jahss
  It is only ten     | _Estas nur la deka_     | eh-stahss noor la
                     |                         |   deh-kah
  The clock is       | _La horo sonas_         | la ho-ro so-nahss
    striking         |                         |


63. Times, Seasons and Weather. (_La Horoj, la Sezonoj, kaj la Vetero._)

(For Vocabularies see §§. 1 & 8.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  This day week      | _Unu semajnon de        | oo-noo sehmah'y-nohn
                     |   hodiaŭ_               |   deh ho-dee'ahw
  That was three or  | _Tio okazis antaŭ tri   | tee-oh ohkah'zeess
    four days ago    |   aŭ kvar tagoj_        |   ahn'tahw tree ahw
                     |                         |   kvahr tah-goy
  To-morrow          | _Du semajnojn de        | doo sehmah'y-nohn deh
    fortnight        |   morgaŭ_               |   mohr'gahw
  At about this time | _Proksimume je tiu ĉi   | prohksee-moo'meh yeh
                     |   horo_                 |   tee-oo chee ho-ro
  In a month's time  | _Post unu monato_       | post oo-noo mohnah'toh
  The first of next  | _La unua de l' proksima | la oonoo'ah dehl
    month            |   monato_               |   prohksee'mah
                     |                         |   mohnah'toh
  In (after) six     | _Post ses semajnoj_     | post sehss sehmah'ynoy
    weeks            |                         |
  On the last day of | _La lastan tagon de l'  | la lah-stahn tah-gohn
    the month        |   monato_               |   dehl mohnah'toh
  At the end of this | _Je la fino de tiu ĉi   | yeh la fee-no deh
    month            |   monato_               |   tee-oo chee
                     |                         |   mohnah'toh
  Towards the middle | _Ĉirkaŭ la mezo de      | cheer'kahw la meh-zo
    of January       |   Januaro_              |   deh yahnooah'ro
  In the course of a | _En la daŭro de unu     | ehn la dahw'ro deh
    week             |   semajno_              |   oo-noo sehmah'y-no
  From time to time  | _De l'tempo al tempo_   | dehl tehmpo ahl tehmpo
  From one day to    | _De unu tago al alia_   | deh oo-noo tah-go ahl
    another          |                         |   ahlee'ah
  A few days ago     | _Antaŭ kelkaj tagoj_    | ahn'tahw kehl'kahy
                     |                         |   tah-goy
  A short time since | _Antaŭ nelonga tempo_   | ahn'tahw nehlohn'gah
                     |                         |   tehmpo
  Scarcely two days  | _Antaŭ apenaŭ du tagoj_ | ahn'tahw apeh'nahw doo
    ago              |                         |   tahgoy
  At least a month   | _Antaŭ almenaŭ unu      | ahn'tahw ahlmeh'nahw
    ago              |   monato_               |   oo-noo mo-nah'toh
  It is full moon    | _Estas plena luno_      | ehstahss plehnah loono
  The heat is        | _La varmo estas         | la varmo ehstahss
    unbearable       |   neelportebla_         |   nehehlpohrteh'blah
  I am very warm     | _Mi estas tre varma_    | mee ehstahss treh varma
  I am afraid it     | _Mi timas, ke pluvos_   | mee teemahss, keh
    will rain        |                         |   ploovohss
  We shall have a    | _Ni havos fulmotondron_ | nee ha-vohss
    storm            |                         |   fool-mo-tohn'drohn
  Did you see the    | _Ĉu vi vidis la         | choo vee vee-dees la
    lightning?       |   fulmon?_              |   fool-mohn?
  I heard the        | _Mi aŭdis la tondron_   | mee ahw-dees la
    thunder          |                         |   tohn-drohn
  How it pours!      | _Kiel pluvegas!_        | kee-ehl plooveh'gahss!
  Would you like an  | _Ĉu vi deziras          | choo vee dehzeer'ahss
    umbrella?        |   pluvombrelon?_        |   ploov-ohmbreh'lohn?
  I am wet through   | _Mi estas trae          | mee eh-stahas trah-eh
                     |   malsekigita_          |   mahlsehkee-ghee'tah
  Look at the        | _Rigardu la ĉielarkon_  | reegahr'doo la
    rainbow          |                         |   chee-ehlahr'kohn
  It is growing very | _Tre malvarmiĝas_       | treh mahlvarmee'jahass
    cold             |                         |
  Winter will soon   | _La vintro baldaŭ       | la veen-tro bahl'dahw
    be here          |   alvenos_              |   ahlveh'nohss
  It snows           | _Neĝas_                 | neh-jahss
  It freezes--it     | _Frostas--degelas_      | fro-stahss--
    thaws            |                         |   dehgheh'lahss
  It is very dirty   | _Estas tre malpure_     | eh-stahss treh
                     |                         |   mahl-poor'eh
  It is very windy   | _Tre ventas_            | treh vehntahss
  How high the wind  | _Kiel forta estas la    | kee-ehl fohrtah
    is!              |   vento!_               |   ehstahss la vehntoh!
  The wind is in the | _La vento blovas el la  | la vehntoh blovahss ehl
    east             |   oriento_              |   la ohree-ehn'toh
  The dust is        | _La polvo estas terura_ | la pohlvo eh-stahss
    terrible         |                         |   teh-roor'ah
  I hope it will be  | _Mi esperas, ke la      | mee espeh'rahss, keh la
    fine             |   vetero estos bela_    |   vehteh'ro ehstohss
                     |                         |   behla
  What a beautiful   | _Kiel bela tago!_       | kee-ehl beh-la tah-go!
    day!             |                         |


64. Post and Telegraph. (_La Poŝto kaj la Telegrafo._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 30.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Number of Customs' | _Nombro de doganaj      | nohm'bro deh
    declarations     |   deklaroj_             |   dohgah'nahy
                     |                         |   dehklah'roy
  Nature of contents | _Priskribo de la        | preeskree'bo deh la
                     |   enhavo_               |   ehnhah'vo
  Value of contents  | _Valoro de la enhavo_   | vahlohr'oh deh la
                     |                         |   ehnhah'vo
  Stamp of office of | _Stampo de la           | stahm-po deh la
    origin           |   elsendinta oficejo_   |   ehl-sehndin'tah
                     |                         |   offeetseh'yo
  Place of           | _Kien sendata_          | kee-ehn sehndah'tah
    destination      |                         |
  Name and address   | _Nomo kaj adreso de     | no-mo kahy ahdreh'so
    of sender        |   l'sendinto_           |   dehl sehndin'toh
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la           | kee-eh ehstahss la
    post-office?     |   poŝtoficejo?_         |   pohst-offeetseh'yo?
  Have you any       | _Ĉu vi havas leterojn   | choo vee hah-vahss
    letters for...?  |   por...?_              |   letehr'oyn pohr...?
  Will this letter   | _Ĉu tiu ĉi letero       | choo tee-oo chee
    go to-night?     |   forsendiĝos jam       |   lehtehr'o
                     |   hodiaŭ nokte?_        |   fohrsendee'johss yahm
                     |                         |   ho-dee'ahw nok-teh?
  What stamp will    | _Kiom estos la afranko  | kee-ohm eh-stohss la
    this letter      |   de tiu ĉi letero?_    |   ahfrahn'ko deh tee-oo
    require?         |                         |   chee lehteh'roh?
  To register a      | _Registri leteron_      | rehghis'tree
    letter           |                         |   lehtehr'ohn
  I wish to send a   | _Mi volas sendi         | mee vo-lahss sehn-dee
    telegram         |   telegramon_           |   tehlehgrah'mohn
  The first ten      | _La unuaj dek vorto_    | la oonoo'ahy dehk
    words            |                         |   vortoy
  Every extra word   | _Ĉiu plua vorto_        | chee-oo ploo-ah vor-toh
  I expect a         | _Mi atendas telegramon  | mee ahten'dahss
    telegram to-day  |   hodiaŭ_               |   tehleh-grah'mohn
                     |                         |   ho-dee'ahw
  When does the post | _Kiam alvenas la        | kee-ahm ahlveh'nahs la
    from Rome come?  |   kuriero de Romo?_     |   kooree-eh'ro deh
                     |                         |   romo?
  The letters will   | _La leteroj estos       | la lehteh'roy eh-stohss
    be delivered     |   alportataj ĉirkaŭ la  |   ahl-portah'tahy
    about noon       |   tagmezo_              |   cheer'kahw la
                     |                         |   tahg-meh'zo
  When does the mail | _Je kioma horo foriras  | yeh kee-oh'ma ho-ro
    leave for Italy? |   la kuriero por        |   foreer'ahss la
                     |   Italujo?_             |   kooree-eh'ro pohr
                     |                         |   eetaloo'yo?
  Is the London mail | _Ĉu la Londona kuriero  | choo la lohndoh'nah
    in yet?          |   ankoraŭ alvenis?_     |   kooree-eh'ro
                     |                         |   ahnko'rahw
                     |                         |   ahlveh'neess?
  When is the next   | _Kiam okazos la         | kee-ahm ohkah'zohss la
    delivery?        |   proksima disporto?_   |   proksee'mah
                     |                         |   dispor'toh?
  The latest         | _La lasta disporto      | la lah-stah dispor'toh
    delivery is      |   okazas je la..._      |   ohkah'zahss yeh la...
    at...            |                         |
  I want a money     | _Mi deziras             | mee dehzeer'ahss
    order for...     |   poŝtmandaton por..._  |   posht-mahndah'tohn
                     |                         |   pohr...
  Payable at the     | _Pagebla ĉe la Ĉefa     | pah-gheh'blah cheh la
    General          |   Poŝtoficejo, Londono_ |   cheh'fah
    Post-office,     |                         |   posht-offeetseh'yo
    London           |                         |   lohndoh'no
  What is the        | _Kiom da afranko pri    | kee-ohm dah ahfrahn'ko
    postage on this  |   tiu ĉi letero?_       |   pree tee-oo chee
    letter?          |                         |   lehteh'roh?
  Is this letter     | _Ĉu tiu ĉi letero estas | choo tee-oo chee
    over-weight?     |   tro peza?_            |   lehteh'roh ehstahss
                     |                         |   tro pehzah?
  It requires        | _Ĝi bezonas pluan       | jee bezoh'nahss plooahn
    another stamp    |   poŝtmarkon_           |   posht-mar'kohn


65. Correspondence. (_La Korespondado_)

(For Vocabulary see §. 31.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  I have a letter to | _Mi devas respondi      | mee deh-vahss
    answer           |   leteron_              |   rehspohn'dee
                     |                         |   lehteh'rohn
  I must write a     | _Mi devas skribi        | mee deh-vahss skreebee
    letter           |   leteron_              |   lehtehr'ohn
  Do you want a pen? | _Ĉu vi deziras plumon?_ | choo vee dehzeer'ahss
                     |                         |   ploo-mon?
  I want some paper  | _Mi bezonas paperon kaj | mee behzoh'nahss
    and envelopes    |   kovertojn_            |   pahpeh'rohn kahy
                     |                         |   kovehr'toyn
  Will you give me   | _Ĉu vi donos al mi      | choo vee doh-nohss ahl
    some?            |   iom?_                 |   mee ee-ohm?
  Lend me a sheet    | _Pruntedonu al mi       | proon-teh-doh'noo ahl
                     |   folion_               |   mee fohlee'ohn
  Have you any?      | _Ĉu vi havas iom?_      | choo vee hah-vahss
                     |                         |   ee-ohm?
  Can you lend me a  | _Ĉu vi povas pruntedoni | choo vee povahss
    pen?             |   al mi plumon?_        |   proon-teh-doh'nee ahl
                     |                         |   mee ploo-mohn?
  Do you like a soft | _Ĉu vi ŝatas molan      | choo vee shah-tahss
    pen?             |   plumon?_              |   mo-lahn ploo-mohn?
  I like a hard one  | _Mi preferas malmolan_  | mee preh-fehr'ahss
                     |                         |   mahlmo'lahn
  Where is the ink?  | _Kie estas la inko?_    | kee-eh eh-stahss la
                     |                         |   eenko?
  There is no ink    | _Ne estas inko_         | neh eh-stahss een-ko
  What is the day of | _La kioma tago de       | la kee-oh'ma tahgo dehl
    the month?       |   l'monato estas?_      |   mo-nah'toh eh-stahss?
  To-day is the      | _Hodiaŭ estas la unua_  | ho-dee'ahw eh-stahss la
    first            |                         |   oonoo'ah
  This is the ninth  | _Hodiaŭ estas la naŭa_  | ho-dee'ahw eh-stahss la
                     |                         |   nah-wah
  Is your letter     | _Ĉu via letero estas    | choo vee-ah lehteh'roh
    ready for the    |   preta par la poŝto?_  |   eh-stahss preh-tah
    post?            |                         |   por la posh-toh?
  Seal your letter   | _Sigelu vian leteron_   | sigeh'loo vee-ahn
                     |                         |   lehteh'rohn
  There is no        | _Ne estas sigelvakso_   | neh eh-stahss
    sealing-wax      |                         |   sigehlvahk'so
  Take this letter   | _Portu tiun ĉi leteron  | portoo tee-oon chee
    to the post      |   al la poŝto_          |   lehteh'rohn ahl la
                     |                         |   posh-toh
  Pay the postage    | _Afranku ĝin_           | ahfrahn'koo jin


66. Legal and Judicial. (_Leĝaj kaj Juraj Frazoj._)

(For Vocabulary, see §. 28.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Call the police    | _Alvoku policanon_      | ahlvo'koo
                     |                         |   pohleet-sah'nohn
  I give this man in | _Mi arestigas tiun ĉi   | mee ahreh-stee'gahss
    charge           |   homon_                |   tee-oon chee ho'mohn
  What do you charge | _Pri kio vi akuzas      | pree kee-oh vee
    him with?        |   lin?_                 |   ahkoo'zahss lin?
  He has stolen my   | _Li ŝtelis mian         | lee shteh-leess mee-ahn
    purse            |   monujon_              |   monoo'yohn
  He has taken my    | _Li prenis mian         | lee prehneess mee-ahn
    watch            |   poŝ-horloĝon_         |   posh-horlo'john
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la           | kee-eh eh-stahss la
    police-station?  |   policejo?_            |   pohleet-seh'yo?
  Have you any       | _Ĉu vi havas            | choo vee hah-vahss
    witnesses?       |   atestantojn?_         |   ahteh-stahn'toyn?
  I have two         | _Mi havas du            | mee hahvahss doo
    witnesses        |   atestantojn_          |   ahtehstahn'toyn
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la           | kee-eh eh-stahss la
    court?           |   tribunalo?_           |   treeboonah'lo?
  You must take out  | _Vi devas eldonigi      | vee deh-vahss
    a summons        |   asignon_              |   ehldoh-nee'ghee
                     |                         |   ahseeg'nohn
  I want a summons   | _Mi deziras asignon_    | mee dehzeer'ahss
                     |                         |   ah-seeg'nohn
  Do you wish to     | _Ĉu vi deziras          | choo vee dehzeer'ahss
    prosecute?       |   persekuti?_           |   pehrsehkoo'tee?
  I don't care to    | _Mi ne volas persekuti_ | mee neh vo-lahss
    prosecute        |                         |   pehr-sehkoo'tee
  What do you        | _Kion vi konsilas?_     | kee'ohn vee
    advise?          |                         |   konsee'lahss?
  What am I to do?   | _Kion mi faru?_         | kee-ohn mee fah-roo?
  Can you recommend  | _Ĉu vi povas rekomendi  | choo vee po-vahss
    me a solicitor?  |   al mi solicitoron?_   |   reh-komehn'dee ahl
                     |                         |   mee
                     |                         |   sohleet-seetor'ohn?
  Will you take up   | _Ĉu vi okupos vin pri   | choo vee ohkoo'pohss
    my case?         |   mia afero?_           |   vin pree mee-ah
                     |                         |   ahfeh'roh?
  Can I have an      | _Ĉu mi povas havi       | choo mee po-vahss
    interpreter?     |   interpretiston?_      |   hahvee
                     |                         |   intehrprehtis'ton?
  I want bail        | _Mi deziras, ke oni min | mee dehzeer'ahss, keh
                     |   liberigu je kaŭcio_   |   oh-nee min
                     |                         |   libehree'goo yeh
                     |                         |   kahwtsee'oh
  Send to my friends | _Sendu iun al miaj      | sehn-doo ee-oon ahl
                     |   amikoj_               |   mee'ahy ahmee'koy
  Where is the       | _Kie estas la Brita     | kee-eh eh-stahss la
    British Embassy  |   Ambasadorejo          |   bree-tah
    (Consulate)?     |   (Konsulejo)?_         |   ahmbahsahdoreh'yo
                     |                         |   (konsooleh'yo)?
  This is quite      | _Tio estas tute         | tee-oh eh-stahss
    wrong            |   malĝusta_             |   too-teh mahl-joos'tah
  It is not just     | _Ne estas juste_        | neh eh-stahss yoos-teh
  I accept your      | _Mi akceptas vian       | mee ahktsehp'tahss
    apology          |   peton_                |   veeahn peh-tohn
  I apologise        | _Mi petas pardonon_     | mee peh-tahss
                     |                         |   pardoh'nohn
  It was all a       | _La tuta afero estis    | la too-tah ahfehr'oh
    mistake          |   eraro_                |   eh-steess ehrah'ro
  I claim damages    | _Mi postulas            | mee postoo'lahss
                     |   monkompenson_         |   mohnkompehn'sohn
  The case is        | _La proceso estas       | la prohtseh'so
    adjourned        |   prokrastita ĝis..._   |   eh-stahss
    until...         |                         |   prohkrah-stee'tah
                     |                         |   jiss...
  I will be here     | _Mi estos tie ĉi_       | mee ehstohss tee-eh
                     |                         |   chee


67. Commercial and Trading. (_Komercaj kaj Negocaj Frazoj._)

(For Vocabulary see §. 29.)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  The firm has       | _La firmo bankrotis_    | la feer'mo
    failed           |                         |   bahnkro'teess
  What assets are    | _Kiom da aktivo estas?_ | kee-ohm dah ahktee'vo
    there?           |                         |   eh-stahss?
  Show me a          | _Montru al mi bilancon_ | mohn-troo ahl mee
    balance-sheet    |                         |   bee-lahnt'sohn
  What dividend is   | _Kioman dividendon oni  | keeohman dividen'dohn
    declared?        |   deklaris?_            |   ohnee deklah'reess?
  The Bank rate is   | _La Banka kurso         | la bahn-kah koor-so
    down             |   malaltiĝis_           |   mahlahltee'jeess
  Send in my account | _Sendu mian konton_     | sehn-doo mee-ahn
                     |                         |   kontohn
  There is an error  | _Estas eraro en via     | eh-stahss eh-rah'ro ehn
    in your account  |   konto_                |   vee-ah kon-toh
  You have           | _Vi kalkulis al mi tro  | vee kahlkoo'leess ahl
    over-charged me  |   kare_                 |   mee tro kah-reh
  This has been paid | _Tio estas pagita_      | teeoh ehstahss
                     |                         |   pahgheetah
  Your account is    | _Estas jam post la      | ehstahss yahm pohst la
    overdue          |   pagdato de via konto_ |   pahg-dah'toh deh
                     |                         |   veeah kon-toh
  Give me a receipt  | _Donu al mi kvitancon_  | donoo ahl mee
                     |                         |   kvitahnt'sohn
  My samples are     | _Miaj specimenoj        | mee'ahy
    delayed          |   malfruas_             |   speht-seemeh'noy
                     |                         |   mahl-froo'ahss
  Your esteemed      | _Via ŝatata mendo       | vee-ah shahtah'tah
    order to hand    |   alvenis_              |   mehndoh ahlveh'neess
  We require trade   | _Ni bezonas             | nee behzoh'nahss
    references       |   negocreferencojn_     |   nehgohts-
                     |                         |   rehfehrent'soyn
  I have a letter of | _Mi havas prezentan     | mee havahss
    introduction     |   leteron_              |   prehzehn'tahn
                     |                         |   lehteh'rohn
  When can you       | _Kiam vi povas liveri   | kee-ahm vee po-vahss
    deliver the      |   la komercaĵojn?_      |   leeveh'ree la
    goods?           |                         |   komehrtsah'zhoyn?
  We will deliver on | _Ni liveros la unuan de | nee leeveh'rohss la
    the 1st proximo  |   la proksima monato_   |   oonoo'ahn deh la
                     |                         |   proksee'mah
                     |                         |   mohnah'toh
  To execute an      | _Plenumi mendon_        | plehnoo'mee mehndohn
    order            |                         |
  Can I insure my    | _Ĉu mi povas asekuri    | choo mee po-vahss
    baggage?         |   miajn pakaĵojn?_      |   ahsehkoo'ree mee'ahyn
                     |                         |   pahkah'zhoyn?
  Your baggage is    | _Viaj pakaĵoj estas     | vee'ahy pahkah'zhoy
    liable to duty   |   imposteblaj_          |   eh-stahss
                     |                         |   imposteh'blahy
  What is the rate?  | _Po kiom?_              | po kee-ohm?
  To discount a bill | _Diskonti kambion_      | diskon'tee kahmbee'ohn
  Will you accept a  | _Ĉu vi akceptos         | choo vee ahktsehp'tohss
    bill?            |   kambion?_             |   kahmbee'ohn?
  Give me your       | _Donu al mi vian        | dohnoo ahl mee vee-ahn
    estimate         |   kostproponon_         |   kost-prohpo'nohn
  Quote me a price   | _Proponu prezon_        | prohpo'noo preh-zohn
  Carriage forward   | _Transporto pagota de   | trahnspor'toh
                     |   la ricevonto_         |   pahgoh'tah deh la
                     |                         |   ritsehvon'toh
  Send by fast train | _Sendu per rapidira     | sehn'doo pehr
                     |   vagono_               |   rahpeedee'rah
                     |                         |   vahgo'no
  It is short weight | _Mankas iom al la pezo_ | mahn-kahss ee-ohm ahl
                     |                         |   la peh-zo
  What is the        | _Kiom estas la pezo?_   | kee-ohm eh-stahss la
    weight?          |                         |   peh-zo?
  The consignment is | _La sendaĵo estas       | la sehndah'zho ehstahss
    bad              |   malbona_              |   mahl-bo'nah
  Not according to   | _Ne laŭ specimeno_      | neh lahw spehtseemeh'no
    sample           |                         |


68. Changing Money. (_Por ŝanĝi monon._)

  English.           | Esperanto.              | Pronunciation.
  -------------------+-------------------------+------------------------
  Where can I get    | _Kie mi povas ŝanĝigi   | kee-eh mee po-vahss
    money changed?   |   monon?_               |   shahnjee'ghee
                     |                         |   mo-nohn?
  I want change for  | _Mi volas havi monerojn | mee volahss hahvee
    a five-pound     |   por kvinfunta         |   moneh'royn por
    note             |   bankbileto_           |   kvinfoon'tah
                     |                         |   bahnk-beeleh'toh
  Will you give me   | _Volu doni al mi Anglan | vo-loo doh-nee ahl mee
    English money?   |   monon?_               |   ahn-glahn mo-nohn?
  What is the        | _Po kiom estas la kurso | po kee-ohm eh-stahss la
    exchange on      |   pri Angla mono?_      |   koor-so pree ahn-glah
    English money?   |                         |   mo-no?
  A bank-note        | _Bankbileto_            | bahnk-beeleh'toh
  Will you change me | _Ĉu vi povas ŝanĝi por  | choo vee po-vahss
    these            |   mi ĉi tiujn funtojn   |   shahnjee por mee chee
    sovereigns?      |   sterlingajn?_         |   tee-ooyn foon-toyn
                     |                         |   stehrlin'gahyn?
  Will you cash this | _Ĉu vi povas ŝanĝi por  | choo vee po-vahss
    cheque for me?   |   mi ĉi tiun ĉekon?_    |   shahnjee por mee chee
                     |                         |   tee-oon cheh-kohn?
  This cheque needs  | _Estas necese, ĝiri     | eh-stahss nehtseh'seh,
    endorsing        |   tiun ĉi ĉekon_        |   jee-ree tee-oon chee
                     |                         |   cheh-kohn




MONEY, WEIGHTS & MEASURES.


MONEY. (_Mono._)

The following tables will be found useful:

English Money, with French, German and Italian Equivalents.

  ENGLISH.     | FRENCH.     |  GERMAN.    | ITALIAN.
  -------------+-------------+-------------+-----------
   £  s. d.    |  Fr.  C.    | Mark  Pf.   | Lire Cent.
  50  0  0     | 1250  00    | 1000  00    | 1260  00
  10  0  0     |  250  00    |  200  00    |  252  00
   5  0  0     |  125  00    |  100  00    |  126  00
   4  0  0     |  100  00    |   80  00    |  100  80
   1  0  0     |   25  00    |   20  00    |   25  20
     16  0     |   20  00    |   16  00    |   20  16
     10  0     |   12  50    |   10  00    |   12  60
      5  0     |    6  25    |    5  00    |    6  30
      4  0     |    5  00    |    4  00    |    5  04
      2  6     |    3  12.5  |    2  50    |    3  15
      1  0     |    1  25    |    1  00    |    1  25
         6     |       62.5  |       50    |       62
         5     |       52    |       41    |       52
         4     |       41    |       33    |       41
         1     |       10    |        8    |       10
         0-1/2 |        5    |        4    |        5

French, German and Italian Money, with English Equivalents.

  FRENCH.       ENGLISH. | GERMAN.   ENGLISH. | ITALIAN.       ENGLISH.
  -----------------------+--------------------+---------------------------
                £  s. d. |              s. d. |                £  s. d.
  50 francs   = 2  0  0  | 1 mark    =  1  0  | 50 lire      = 1 19  8
  20   "      =   16  0  | 8 pfennig =     1  | 20  "        =   16  0
   5   "      =    4  0  | 4   "     =   1/2  |  5  "        =    4  0
   1 franc    =      10  |                    |  1 lira      =       9-1/2
  10 centimes =       1  |                    | 10 centesimi =       1
   5    "     =     1/2  |                    |  5    "      =     1/2

Considerable use is also made by Esperantists of the International
Aŭiliary Money-unit (_Internacia Helpa Mono_) introduced by M. René de
Saussure, of the Internacia Scienca Asocio, Geneva. The unit is the
_Speso_, equivalent to one-tenth of a farthing in English money.

  10 _spesoj_ (abbr. 10 _s._) = 1 _spesdeko_ (1 _sd._) = 1/4d.
  100 _spesdekoj_ (100 _sd._) = 1 _spesmilo_ (1 _sm._) = 2s. 0d.
  1 _sm._ = 100 _sd._ = 1,000 _s._

The approximate values of 10 _spesmiloj_ in terms of the various
national units are as follows: 10 _spesmiloj_ = 25 francs = 20 shillings
= 20 marks = 5 dollars = 24 Austrian kroner = 18 Scandinavian kroner =
12 Dutch florins = 9-1/2 roubles = 4-1/2 Portuguese milreis = 9
Brazilian milreis = 5 pesetas = 9-3/4 yen.

The chief point to remember is that 1 _spesmilo_ equals 2 shillings, and
1 _spesdeko_ equals approximately 1 farthing.


WEIGHTS & MEASURES. (_Pezoj kaj Mezuroj._)

The Metric System is the one in general use among Esperantists. The
following table shows the essential decimal character of the system:

  Parts.            Length.           Weight.         Capacity.
  One-thousandth.   Milimetro.        Miligramo.      Mililitro.
  One-hundredth.    Centimetro.       Centigramo.     Centilitro.
  One-tenth.        Decimetro.        Decigramo.      Decilitro.
  ONE.              METRO (unit).     GRAMO (unit).   LITRO (unit).
  Ten.              Dekametro.        Dekagramo.      Dekalitro.
  Hundred.          Hektometro.       Hektogramo.     Hektolitro.
  Thousand.         Kilometro.        Kilogramo.      Kilolitro.


MEASURES OF LENGTH. (_Mezuroj de Longeco._)

  English.                 Esperanto.
  1 inch                =  2.54 _centimetroj_
  1 foot (12 in.)       =  30.48 "
  1 yard (3 ft.)        =  91.43 "
  1 furlong (220 yds.)  =  201 _metroj_
  1 mile (1760 yds.)    =  1.61 _kilometroj_
  5 miles               =  8.05 "

  Esperanto.               English.
  1 _centimetro_        =  0.394 (1/3) inch
  1 _decimetro_         =  3.94 inches
  1 _metro_             =  39.37 in. (3 ft. 3-1/3 in.)
  1 _hektometro_        =  109 yds. 1 ft.
  1 _kilometro_         =  1093 yds. (5/8 mile)
  5 _kilometroj_        =  3 miles 220 yds.


WEIGHTS. (_Pezoj._)

  English.                 Esperanto.
  1 ounce...            =  28 _gramoj_
  1 lb. (16 oz.)        =  453   "
  1 stone (14 lb.)      =  6 _kilo._ 345 _gr._
  1 quarter (28 lb.)    =  12 _kilo._ 690 _gr._
  1 cwt. (112 lb.)      =  50 _kilo._ 750 _gr._
  1 ton (20 cwt.)       =  1015 _kilogramoj_

  Esperanto.               English.
  1 _gramo_             =  .0357 (1/30) oz. (15.432 gr.)
  1 _hektogramo_        =  3-1/2 oz.
  1 _kilogramo_         =  2.2 lb.
  5 _kilogramoj_        =  11 lb.
  1000    "             =  19 cwt. 2 qr. 23 lb.


LIQUIDS. (_Fluidaĵoj._)

  English.                 Esperanto.
  1 pint                =    0.57 _litro_
  1 quart (2 pints)     =    1.14 _litroj_
  1 gallon (4 quarts)   =    4.54    "
  1 barrel (36 gallons) =  160.32    "
  1 hogshead (54 gall.) =  240.48    "

  Esperanto.               English.
  1 _litro_             =  1.76 (1-3/4) pints (0.22 gall.)
  5 _litroj_            =  1 gallon 1 pint
  1 _hektolitro_        =  22 gallons
  1 _kilolitro_         =  220   "


AREA. (_Areo._)

  English.                              Esperanto.
  1 sq. inch                         =  6.45 _kvadrataj centimetroj_
  1 sq. foot                         =  9.29      "    _decimetroj_
  1 sq. yard                         =  83.6      "    _decimetroj_
  1 acre                             =  4046.78 _kv. metroj_

  Esperanto.                            English.
  1 _centiaro_ (1 _kv. metro_)       =  1.196 sq. yd.
  1 _aro_ (100 _kv. metroj_)         =  0.099 rood
  1 _hektaro_ (10,000 _kv. metroj_)  =  2.471 acres

The following Esperanto translations of English units are sometimes
needed: _Colo_, inch; _futo_, foot; _jardo_, yard; _mejlo_, mile;
_unco_, ounce; _funto_, pound; _ekro_, acre.


POSTAGE.

The postage on LETTERS from the United Kingdom to foreign countries
(except Egypt and the United States) is 2-1/2d. for 1 ounce, and 1-1/2d.
for each succeeding ounce or fraction thereof; POSTCARDS, 1d.;
NEWSPAPERS, 1/2d. for every 2 ounces; COMMERCIAL PAPERS, 2-1/2d. for the
first 10 ounces, and 1/2d. per 2 ounces thereafter. Special Coupons for
PREPAYMENT OF REPLY are issued in connection with many countries.

                                 NOTES

  [1] _Any information as to Esperanto groups, literature, etc., may be
    obtained on application to The British Esperanto Association, 142,
    High Holborn, London, W.C. 1._

  [2] The names of trees and bushes are formed by adding the suffix
    _-uj_ (or simply _-arbo_, tree) to the root denoting the fruit or
    flower. E.g., _pruno_, plum--_prunujo_ or _prunarbo_, plum-tree;
    _marono_, chestnut--_maronujo, maronarbo_, chestnut-tree; _rozo_,
    rose--_rozujo, rozarbeto_, rose-bush.

  [3] See §. "The Noun."

  [4] Where a country is called after its inhabitants, the Esperanto
    name for it is formed by adding the suffix *-uj* (= that which
    contains, see section "Suffixes") or *-lando* (land) to the root
    denoting the inhabitant. Thus: _Belg-o_, Belgian--_Belg-ujo_,
    Belgium; _Brito_, Briton--_Grandbritujo_, Great Britain; _Sviso_, a
    Swiss--_Svisujo_, Switzerland; or _Belgolando, Skotlando,
    Anglolando, Svislando,_ etc. Where the name of the inhabitants is
    formed from that of the country, use is made of the suffix *-ano* (=
    member of). Thus: _Eŭropo_, Europe--_Eŭropano_, European; _Irlando_,
    Ireland--_Irlandano_, Irishman.

  [5] See *-an*, section "Suffixes".

  [6] See section "Participles".

  [7] See section "Suffixes".

  [8] See section "Suffixes".

  [9] For this purpose the small penny Esperanto "key," which contains
    the fundamental roots of the language, will be found useful. It may
    be obtained of any Esperanto bookseller.


-------------------
TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES

Text printed in _italics_ or in *bold* was represented as shown.

References to page numbers have been rewritten to use section titles or
numbers (including sections 38 to 68 which are not numbered in the
original).

The following typographic errors were corrected:

    p. 20, _piedovojeto_ > _piedvojeto_
    p. 46, _ŝraubturnilo_ > _ŝraŭbturnilo_
    p. 60, _Telephono_ > _Telefono_ (in title)
    p. 78, _double_ > _duoble_ (_duoble_, doubly)
    p. 85, _-ac_ > _-aĉ_
    p. 87, _autaŭ'ĉambro_ > _antaŭ'ĉambro_
    p. 101, _Lauhore_ > _Laŭhore_
    p. 103, _esta_ > _estas_ (_Ĉu la matenmanĝo estas...?_)
    p. 108, _miaj-amikoj_ > _miaj amikoj_
    p. 114, _ŝraubingon_ > _ŝraŭbingon_
    p. 118, ight-horse-power > eight-horse-power

as well as several punctuation errors and inconsistencies in the
Prononciation column of the tables, which were silently corrected.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Esperanto Self-Taught with Phonetic
Pronunciation, by William W. Mann

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESPERANTO SELF-TAUGHT ***

***** This file should be named 23984-0.txt or 23984-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/9/8/23984/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Laurent Vogel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
